It's hard for us humans to make any kind
of clean predictions about highly
nonlinear dynamical systems. But again
to your point, we might be very
surprised what classical learning
systems might be able to do about even
fluid.
>> Yes, exactly. I mean fluid dynamics,
Navia Stokes equations, these are
traditionally thought of as very very
difficult intractable problems to do on
classical systems. They take enormous
amounts of compute, you know, weather
prediction systems, you know, these kind
of things all involve fluid dynamics
calculations. But again, if you look at
something like VO, our video generation
model, it can model liquids quite well,
surprisingly well, and materials,
specular lighting. I love the ones
where, you know, there's there's people
have generated videos where there's like
clear liquids going through hydraulic
presses and then being squeezed out. I I
used to write uh physics engines and
graphics engines and in my early days in
gaming. And I know it's just so
painstakingly hard to build programs
that can do that. And yet somehow these
systems are, you know, reverse
engineering from just watching YouTube
videos. So presumably what's happening
is it's extracting some underlying
structure around how these materials
behave. So perhaps there is some kind of
lower dimensional manifold that can be
learned if we actually fully understood
what's going on under the hood. That's
maybe, you know, maybe true of most of
reality.
The following is a conversation with
Demis Hassabis, his second time on the
podcast. He is the leader of Google Deep
Mind and is now a Nobel Prize winner.
Demis is one of the most brilliant and
fascinating minds in the world today,
working on understanding and building
intelligence and exploring the big
mysteries of our universe.
This was truly an honor and a pleasure
for me. This is the Lex Freedman
podcast. To support it, please check out
our sponsors in the description and
consider subscribing to this channel.
And now, dear friends, here's Deus
Hassavas.
In your Nobel Prize lecture, you propose
what I think is a super interesting
conjecture that quote any pattern that
can be generated or found in nature can
be efficiently discovered and modeled by
a classical learning algorithm. What
kind of patterns of systems might be
included in that? Biology, chemistry,
physics, maybe cosmology,
>> neuroscience. What what are we talking
about?
>> Sure. Well, look, I I felt that it's
sort of a tradition, I think, of Nobel
Prize lectures that you're supposed to
be a little bit provocative and I wanted
to follow that tradition. What I was
talking about there is if you take a
step back and you look at um all the
work that we've done especially with the
alpha x projects so I'm thinking alpho
of course alpha fold what they really
are is we're building models of very
combinatorily highdimensional spaces
that you know if you tried to brute
force a solution find the best move and
go or find the the exact shape of a
protein and if you enumerated all the
possibilities you there wouldn't be
enough time in the in the you know the
time of the universe. So you have to do
something much smarter and what we did
in both cases was build models of those
environments. Um and that guided the
search in a in a smart way and that
makes it tractable. So if you think
about protein folding which is obviously
a natural system you know why should
that be possible? How does physics do
that? You know proteins fold in
milliseconds in our bodies. So somehow
physics solves this problem that we've
now also solved computationally. And I
think the reason that's possible is that
in nature, natural systems have
structure because they were subject to
evolutionary processes that that shape
them. And if that's true, then you can
maybe learn uh uh what that structure
is. So this perspective, I think, is
really interesting one. You've hinted it
at it, which is almost like uh crudely
stated. Anything that can be evolved can
be efficiently modeled. Think there's
some truth to that. Yeah, I sometimes
call it survival of the stablest or
something like that because you know
it's it's of course there's evolution
for life uh living things but there's
also you know if you think about
geological time so the shape of
mountains that's been shaped by
weathering processes right over
thousands of years but then you can even
take it cosmological the orbits of
planets the um shapes of asteroids these
have all been survived kind of processes
that have acted on them many many times
so if that's true then there should some
sort of pattern um that you can kind of
reverse learn and uh a kind of manifold
really that helps you uh uh search to
the right solution to the right shape um
and actually allow you to predict things
about it uh in an efficient way because
it's not a random pattern right so um it
may not be possible for for man-made
things or abstract things like
factorizing large numbers because unless
there's patterns in the number space
which there might be but if there's not
and it's uniform then there's no pattern
to learn there's no model to learn that
will help you search. So you have to do
brute force. So in that case you you
know you maybe need a quantum computer
something like this. But in most things
in nature that we're interested in uh
are not like that. They have structure
um that evolved for a reason and
survived over time. And if that's true I
think that's potentially learnable by a
neural network.
>> It's like nature is doing a search
process and it's so fascinating that
it's in that search process is creating
systems that could be efficiently
modeled. That's right. Yeah.
>> So interesting.
>> So they can be efficiently rediscovered
or recovered um because nature is not
random, right? These everything that we
see around us, including like the
elements that are more stable, all of
those things, they're subject to um some
kind of selection process pressure. Do
you think because you're also a fan of
theoretical computer science and
complexity, do you think we can come up
with a kind of complexity class like a
complexity zoo type of class where maybe
it's the set of learnable systems, the
set of learnable natural systems, lns.
>> Yeah,
>> this is a deis new class of systems that
could be actually learnable by classical
systems in this kind of way. Natural
systems that can be uh modeled
efficiently. Yeah, I mean I' I've always
been fascinated by the P= MP question
and what is modelable by classical
systems I non-quantum systems you know
cheuring machines in effect and that's
exactly what I'm working on actually in
kind of my few moments of spare time
with a few colleagues about is should
there be you know maybe a new class of
problem that is solvable by this type of
neural network process and kind of
mapped on to these natural systems so
you know the things that exist in
physics
and have structure. So I think that
could be a very interesting uh new way
of thinking about it. And it sort of
fits with the way I think about physics
in general which is that you know I
think information is primary.
Information is the most sort of
fundamental unit of the universe more
fundamental than energy and matter. I
think they can all be converted into
each other but I think of the universe
as a kind of informationational system.
>> So when you think of the universe as
anformational system then the P= NP
question is a is a physics question.
>> That's right. And it's a question that
can help us actually solve the entirety
of this whole thing going on.
>> Yeah, I think it's one of the most uh
fundamental questions actually if you
think of physics asformational
uh and and the answer to that I think is
going to be you know very enlightening.
more specific to the PNNP question.
This again, some of the stuff we're
saying is kind of crazy right now. Just
like the Christian Edinson Nobel Prize
speech controversial thing that he said
sounded crazy and then you went and got
a Nobel Prize for this with John Jumper
solved the problem. So, let me let me
just stick to the P equals MP. Do you
think there's something
in this thing we're talking about that
could be shown if you can do something
like uh polomial time or constant time
compute ahead of time and construct this
gigantic model then you can solve some
of these extremely difficult problems in
a theoretical computer science kind of
way.
>> Yeah, I think that there are actually a
huge class of problems that could be
couched in this way. the way we did
alpha go and the way we did alpha fold
where you know you you model what the
dynamics of the system is the the the
the properties of that system the
environment that you're trying to
understand and then that makes the
search for the solution or the
prediction of the next step efficient
basically polomial time so tractable by
a uh classical system uh which a neural
network is it runs on normal computers
right classical computers uh chewing
machines in effect and um I think it's
one of the most interesting questions
there is is how far can that paradigm
go? You know, I think we've proven uh
and the AI community in general that
classical systems, cheuring machines can
go a lot further than we previously
thought. You know, they can do things
like model the structures of proteins
and play go to better than world
champion level. And uh you know a lot of
people would have thought maybe 10 20
years ago that was decades away or maybe
you would need some sort of quantum
machines to to quantum systems to be
able to do things like protein folding.
And so I think we haven't really uh even
sort of scratched the surface yet of
what uh classical systems socalled uh uh
could do. And of course AGI being built
on a on a neural network system on top
of a neural network system on top of a
classical computer would be the ultimate
expression of that. And I think the
limit you know the the what what the
bounds of that kind of system what it
can do it's a very interesting question
and and and directly speaks to the P
equals MP question.
What do you think again hypothetical
might be outside of this maybe
emergent phenomena like if you look at
cellular automa some of the you have
extremely simple systems and then some
complexity emerges yes
>> maybe that would be outside or even
would you guess even that might be
amendable
>> to efficient modeling by a classical
machine
>> yeah I think those systems would be
right on the boundary right so um I
think most emergent systems cellular
automter things that could be modelable
by a classical system. You just sort of
do a forward simulation of it and it
probably be efficient enough. Um, of
course there's the question of things
like chaotic systems where the initial
conditions really matter and then you
get to some, you know, uncorrelated end
state those could be difficult to model.
So I think these are kind of the open
questions. But I think when you step
back and look at what we've done with
the systems and the and the problems
that we've solved and then you look at
things like V3 on like video generation
sort of rendering physics and lighting
and things like that, you know, really
core fundamental things in physics. Um
it's pretty interesting. I think it's
telling us something quite fundamental
about how the universe is structured in
my opinion. Um so you know in a way
that's what I want to build AGI for is
to help uh us uh as scientists answer
these questions uh like p=mp.
>> Yeah I think we might be continuously
surprised about what is modelable by
classical computers. I mean alpha fold 3
on the interaction side is surprising
that you can make any kind of progress
on that direction. Alpha genome is
surprising that you can map the genetic
code to the function kind of playing
with the emergent kind of phenomena. You
think there's so many combinatorial
options that and then here you go. You
can find the kernel that is efficiently
modeled.
>> Yes. Because there's some structure
there's some landscape you know in the
energy landscape or whatever it is that
you can follow some gradient you can
follow. And of course what neural
networks are very good at is following
gradients. And so if there's one to
follow and object and you can specify
the objective function correctly you
know you don't have to deal with all
that complexity which I think is how we
maybe have naively thought about it for
decades those problems if you just
enumerate all the possibilities it looks
totally intractable and there's many
many problems like that and then you
think well it's like 10^ the 300
possible protein structures uh it's 10^
theund you know 70 possible go positions
all of these are way more than atoms in
the universe so how could one possibly
find the the right solution or predict
the next step and and it but it turns
out that it is possible and of course
reality nature does do it right proteins
do fold so that that gives you
confidence that there must be if we
understood how physics was doing that uh
in a sense uh then and we could mimic
that process I model that process uh it
should be possible on our classical
systems is is is basically what the
conjecture is about
>> and of course there's nonlinear
dynamical systems, highly nonlinear
dynamical systems, everything involving
fluid.
>> Yes.
>> Right.
>> You know, I recently had a conversation
with Terrence Ta who mathematically
uh it contends with a very difficult
aspect of systems that have some
singularities in them that break the
mathematics and it's just hard for us
humans to make any kind of clean
predictions about highly nonlinear
dynamical systems. But again to your
point we might be very surprised what
classical learning systems might be able
to do about even fluid. Yes, exactly. I
mean fluid dynamics, Navia Stokes
equations, these are traditionally
thought of as very very difficult
intractable kind of problems to do on
classical systems. They take enormous
amounts of compute, you know, weather
prediction systems, you know, these kind
of things all involve fluid dynamics
calculations. And um but again, if you
look at something like VO, our video
generation model, it can model liquids
quite well, surprisingly well, and
materials, specular lighting. I love the
ones where, you know, there's there's
people have generated videos where
there's like clear liquids going through
hydraulic presses and then being
squeezed out. I I used to write uh
physics engines and graphics engines and
in my early days in gaming and I know
it's just so painstakingly hard to build
programs that can do that and yet
somehow these systems are, you know,
reverse engineering from just watching
YouTube videos. So presumably what's
happening is it's extracting some
underlying structure around how these
materials behave. So perhaps there is
some kind of lower dimensional manifold
that can be learned if we actually fully
understood what's going on under the
hood. That's maybe you know maybe true
of most of reality.
>> Yeah. I've been continuously precisely
by this aspect of V3. I think a lot of
people highlight different aspects,
including the comedic and the meme and
all that kind of stuff. And then the
ultra realistic ability to capture
humans in a really nice way that's
compelling and feels close to reality
and then combine that with native audio.
All of those are marvelous things about
V3. But the exactly the thing you're
mentioning, which is the physics.
>> Yeah,
>> it's not perfect, but it's pretty damn
good. And then the really interesting
scientific question is what is it
understanding about our world
>> in order to be able to do that because
of the cynical take with diffusion
models there's no way it understands
anything
>> but it seem I mean I don't think you can
generate that kind of video without
understanding and then our own
philosophical notion what it means to
understand then is like brought to the
surface like do to what degree do you
think V3 understands our world? I think
to the extent that it can predict the
next frames you know in a coherent way
that's some that is a form you know of
understanding right not in the
anthropomorphic version of you know it's
not some kind of deep philosophical
understanding of what's going on I don't
think these systems have that but they
they certainly have uh modeled enough of
the dynamics you know put it that way
that they can pretty accurately generate
whatever it is 8 seconds of consistent
video that by eye at least you know at a
glance is quite hard to distinguish what
the issues are and imagine that in two
or three more years time. That's the
thing I'm thinking about and how
incredible that there will look uh given
where we've come from, you know, the
early versions of that uh one or two
years ago. And so, um the rate of
progress is incredible. And I think um
I'm like you is like a lot of people
love all of the the the the standup
comedians and the the that actually
captures a lot of human dynamics very
well and and body language, but actually
the thing I'm most impressed with and
fascinated by is the physics behavior,
the lighting and materials and liquids.
And it's pretty amazing that it can do
that. And I think that shows that it has
some notion of at least intuitive
physics, right? um how things are
supposed to work uh intuitively maybe
the way that uh a human child would
understand physics right as opposed to a
you know a PhD student really uh being
able to unpack all the equations it's
more of an intuitive physics
understanding
>> well that intuitive
physics understanding that's the base
layer that's the thing people sometimes
call like common sense like it it really
understands something I think that
really surprised a lot of people it
blows my mind that
>> I just didn't think it would be possible
to generate that level of realism
without understanding.
>> You there's this notion that you can
only understand the physical world by
having an embodied AI system, a robot
that interacts with that world. That's
the only way to construct an
understanding of that world. But V3 is
directly challenging that it feels like
>> yes and it's very interesting you know
even if we if you were to ask me 5 10
years ago I would have said even though
I was immersed in all of this I would
have said well yeah you probably need to
understand intuitive physics you know
like if I push this off the table this
glass it will maybe shatter you know um
and and the liquid will spill out right
so we know all of these things but I
thought that you know and there's a lot
of theories in neuroscience it's called
action in perception where you know you
you need to act in the world to really
truly perceive it in a deep way. And
there was a lot of theories about you
need embodied intelligence or robotics
or something or maybe at least simulated
action uh so that you would understand
things like intuitive physics. But it
seems like um you can understand it
through passive observation which is
pretty surprising to me and and again I
think hints at something underlying
about the nature of uh reality in in my
opinion beyond um just the you know the
cool videos that it generates. Um and
and of course there's next stages is
maybe even making those videos
interactive. So uh one can actually step
into them and move around them. Um which
would be really mind-blowing especially
given my games background. So you can
imagine and then and then I think you
know you're we're starting to get
towards what I would call a world model
a model of how the world works the
mechanics of the world the physics of
the world and the things in that world.
And of course that's what you would need
for a true AGI system.
>> I have to talk to you about video games.
So, you were being a bit trolly. I I
think you're you're having more and more
fun on Twitter on X, which is great to
see. So, guy named Jimmy Apples tweeted,
"Let me play a video game of my V3
videos already. Uh, Google cooked so
good playable world models when spelled
we n question mark." Uh, and then you
quote tweeted that with, "Now, wouldn't
that be something?" So, how how hard is
it to build game worlds with AI? Maybe
can you look out into the future
uh of video games 5 10 years out? What
do you think that looks like?
>> Well, games were my first love really
and doing AI for games was the first
thing I did professionally in my teenage
years and and was the first major AI
systems that I built and uh I always
want to have I want to scratch that itch
one day and come back to that. though,
you know, and I will do, I think, and um
I think I'd sort of dream about, you
know, what would I have done back in the
'90s if I'd had access to the kind of AI
systems we have today? And I think you
could build absolutely mind-blowing
games. Um, and I think the next stage is
I always used to love making all the
games I've made are openw world games.
So, they're games where there's a
simulation and then there's AI
characters and then the player uh
interacts with that simulation and the
simulation adapts to the way the player
plays. And I always thought they were
the coolest games because uh so games
like theme park that I worked on where
everybody's game experience would be
unique to them, right? Because you're
kind of co-creating the game, right? Uh
we set up the parameters, we set up
initial conditions, and then you as the
player immersed in it, and then you are
co-creating it with the with the
simulation. But of course, it's very
hard to program open world games. you
know, you've got to be able to create uh
content whichever direction the player
goes in and you want it to be compelling
no matter what the player chooses. Um,
and so it was always quite difficult to
build uh things like cellular automter
actually type of those kind of classical
systems which created some emergent
behavior. Um, but they're always a
little bit fragile, a little bit
limited. Now we're maybe on the cusp in
the next few years, 5 10 years of having
AI systems that can truly create around
your imagination. um can nar sort of
dynamically change the story and
storytell the narrative around uh and
make it dramatic no matter what you end
up choosing. So it's like the ultimate
choose your own adventure sort of game.
And uh you know I think maybe we're
within reach if you think of a kind of
interactive version of VO uh and then
wind that forward 5 to 10 years and you
know imagine how good it's going to be.
>> Yeah. So you said a lot of super
interesting stuff there. So one the open
world
built into that is a deep
personalization the way you've described
it.
>> So it's not just that it's open world
like you can open any door and there'll
be something there. It's that the choice
of which door you open
>> in an unconstrained way defines the
worlds you see. So some games try to do
that to give you choice. Yes. But it's
really just an illusion of choice
because
>> the only uh like like Stanley Parable
game I recently played. It's it's it's
really there's a couple of doors and it
really just takes you down a narrative.
Stanley Parable is a great video game I
recommend people play that kind of uh in
a meta way uh mocks the illusion of
choice and there's philosophical notions
of free will and so on. But uh I do like
one of my favorite games of Elder
Scrolls is Daggerfall. I believe that
they really played with a like random
generation of the dungeons.
>> Yeah.
>> Of you can step in and they give you
this feeling of an open world and there
you mentioned interactivity. You don't
need to interact. That's a first step
cuz you don't need to interact that
much. You just when you open the door,
whatever you see is randomly generated
for you.
>> Yeah. And that's already an incredible
experience because you might be the only
person to ever see that.
>> Yeah. Exactly. And and so but what you'd
like is a little bit better than just
sort of a random generation, right? So
you'd like uh and and also better than a
simple AB hardcoded choice, right?
That's not really uh open world, right?
As you say, it's just giving you the
illusion of choice. What you want to be
able to do is is potentially anything in
that game environment. Um, and I think
the only way you can do that is to have
uh generated systems, systems that uh
will generate that on the fly. Of
course, you can't create infinite
amounts of game assets, right? It's
expensive enough already how AAA games
are made today. And that was obvious to
to us back in the '9s when I was working
on all these games. I think maybe Black
and White uh was the game that I worked
on, early stages of that that had the
still probably the best AI learning AI
in it. It was an early reinforcement
learning system that you, you know, you
were, you were looking after this
mythical creature and growing it and
nurturing it and depending how you
treated it, it would treat the villagers
in that world in the same way. So if you
were mean to it, it would be mean. If
you were good, it would be protective.
And so it was really a reflection of the
way you played it. So actually all of
the uh I've been working on sort of
simulations and AI through the medium of
games at the beginning of my career and
and really the whole of what I do today
is still a follow on from uh those early
more hardcoded ways of doing the AI to
now you know fully general learning
systems that that are trying to achieve
the same thing.
>> Yeah, it's been uh interesting,
hilarious, and uh fun to watch you and
Elon obviously itching to create games
because you're both gamers. And one of
the sad aspects of your uh incredible
success in so many domains of science
like serious adult stuff.
>> Yeah.
>> That you might not have time to really
create a game. You might end up creating
the tooling that others would create the
game. You have to watch
>> other others create the thing you've
always dreamed of. Do you think it's
possible you can somehow in your
extremely busy schedule actually find
time to create something like black and
white? some some an actual video game
where like you could make the childhood
dream come become reality.
>> You know, there's two things way to
think about that is maybe with vibe
coding as it gets better and there's a
possibility that I could, you know, one
could do that actually in in your spare
time. So, I'm quite excited about that
as a as that would be my project if if I
got the time to do some vibe coding. Um
I'm actually itching to do that. And
then the other thing is, you know, maybe
it's a sbatical after agi has been
safely stewarded into the world and
delivered into the world. You know, that
and then working on my physics theory as
we talked about at the beginning. Those
would be the two my my two post AGI
projects. Let's call it that way.
>> I I would love to see which game post
AGI which you choose. Solving uh the the
problem that some of the smartest people
in human history contended with, you
know, P equals MP
or creating a cool video. Yeah. Well,
but they might but in my world they'd be
related because it would be an openw
world simulated game uh as realistic as
possible. So, you know what what is what
is the universe? That's that's that's
speaking to the same question, right?
NPL MP. I think all these things are
related, at least in my mind. I mean in
a really serious way like video games
sometimes are looked down upon as just
this fun side activity but especially as
AI does more and more of the difficult
uh boring tasks something we in in
modern world call work.
You know video games is the thing in
which we may find meaning in which we
may find like what to do with our time.
You could create incredibly rich,
meaningful experiences. Like that's what
human life is. And then in video games,
you can create more sophisticated,
more diverse
ways of living,
>> right?
>> I think so. I mean, those of us who love
games, and I still do, is is is
um you know, it's almost can let your
imagination run wild, right? Like I I
used to love games um and working on
games. so much because it's the fusion
especially in the '9s and early 2000s
the sort of golden era maybe the 80s of
of of game of the games industry and it
was all being discovered new genres were
being discovered we weren't just making
games we felt we were we were creating a
new entertainment medium that never
existed before especially with these
open world games and simulation games
where you were co-create you as the
player were co-creating the story
there's no other media uh entertainment
media where you do that where you as the
audience actually co-create the the
story and of course Now with multiplayer
games as well, it can be a very social
activity and can explore all kinds of
interesting worlds in that. But on the
other hand, you know, it's very
important to um also enjoy and
experience uh the physical world. But
the question is then, you know, I think
we're going to have to kind of confront
the question again of what is the
fundamental nature of reality? uh what
is the going to be the difference
between these increasingly realistic
simulations and uh multiplayer ones and
emergent um and what we do in the real
world.
>> Yeah, there's clearly a huge amount of
value to experiencing the real world
nature. There's also a huge amount of
value in experiencing other humans
directly in person the way we're sitting
here today.
>> But we need to really scientifically
rigorously answer the question why.
>> Yeah. And which aspect of that can be
mapped into the virtual world.
>> Exactly.
>> It's not it's not enough to say, "Yeah,
you should go touch grass and hang out
in nature." It's like, why exactly is
that valuable?
>> Yes. And I guess that's maybe the thing
that's been uh haunting me, obsessing me
from the beginning of my career. If you
think about all the different things
I've done, that's they're all related in
that way. This simulation, nature of
reality, and what is the bounds of, you
know, what can be modeled. Sorry for the
ridiculous question, but so far, what is
the greatest video game of all time?
What's up there?
>> Well, my favorite one of all time is
Civilization. I have to say that that
was the the the Civilization 1 and
Civilization 2. My favorite games of all
time. Um
>> I can only assume you've avoided the
most recent one because it would
probably you would that would be your
sobatical that you would disappear.
>> Yes, exactly. They take a lot of time
these Civilization games. So, I got to
be careful with them.
>> Fun question. You and Elon seem to be
somehow solid gamers. Uh is there a
connection between being great at gaming
and and uh being great leaders of AI
companies?
>> I don't know. I It's an interesting one.
I mean uh we both love games and uh it's
interesting he wrote games as well to
start off with. It's probably especially
in the era I grew up in where home
computers were just became a thing, you
know, in the late ' 80s and '9s,
especially in the UK. I had a Spectrum
and then a Commodore Omega 500 which is
my my favorite computer ever and that's
why I learned all my programming and of
course it's a very fun thing uh to
program is to program games. So I think
it's a great way to learn programming
probably still is and um and then of
course I immediately took it in
directions of AI and simulations which
so I may was able to express my interest
in in games and my sort of wider
scientific interests alto together. And
then the final thing I think that's
great about games is it fuses um
artistic design, you know, art with the
the the most cutting edge programming.
Um so again, in the '90s, all of the
most interesting uh technical advances
were happening in gaming, whether that
was AI, graphics, physics engines, uh
hardware, even GPUs of course were
designed for gaming originally. Um so
everything that was pushing computing
forward in the in the '9s was due to
gaming. So interestingly that was where
the forefront of research was going on
and it was this incredible fusion with
with art um you know graphics but also
music and just the whole new media of
storytelling and I love that. For me
it's this sort of multi-disiplinary kind
of effort is again something I've
enjoyed my whole my whole life. I have
to ask you, I almost forgot about one of
the many and I would say one of the most
incredible things recently uh that
somehow didn't yet get enough attention
is alpha evolve.
>> We talked about evolution a little bit
but it's the Google deep mind system
that evolves algorithms.
>> Yeah.
>> Are these kinds of evolution-like
techniques promising as a component of
future super intelligence system? So for
people who don't know, it's kind of um I
don't know if it's fair to say it's LLM
guided
evolution search.
>> Yeah.
>> So evolutionary algorithms are doing the
search and LLMs are telling you where.
>> Yes. Exactly. So LLMs are kind of
proposing some possible solutions and
then you do you use evolutionary
computing on top to to to find some
novel part of the of the search space.
So actually I think it's an example of
very promising directions where you
combine LLMs or foundation models with
other computational techniques.
Evolutionary methods is one but you
could also imagine Monte Carlo research
basically many types of search
algorithms or reasoning algorithms sort
of on top of or using the foundation
models as a basis. So, I actually think
there's quite a lot of interesting uh
things to be discovered probably with
these sort of hybrid systems, let's call
them.
>> But not to romanticize evolution. Yeah,
>> I'm only human. But you think there's
some value in whatever that mechanism is
because we already talked about natural
systems. Do you think where there's a
lot of lowhanging fruit of us
understanding being being able to model
uh being able to simulate evolution and
then using that whatever we understand
about that nature inspired mechanism to
to then do surge better and better and
better.
>> Yes. So if you think about uh again
breaking down the sort of systems we've
built uh to their really fundamental
core, you've got like the model of the
of the underlying dynamics of the
system. Uh and then if you want to
discover something new, something novel
that hasn't been seen before, um then
you need some kind of search process on
top to take you to a novel region of the
of the of the search space. And um you
can do that in a number of ways.
Evolutionary computing is one. um with
Alph Go we just use Monte Carlo research
right and that's what found move 37 the
new kind of never seen before strategy
in go and so that's how you can go
beyond potentially what is already known
so the model can model everything that
you currently know about right all the
data that you currently have but then
how do you go beyond that so that starts
to speak about the ideas of creativity
how can these systems create something
new discover something new obviously
this is super relevant for scientific
discovery or pushing met science and
medicine forward, which we want to do
with these systems. And you can actually
bolt on some uh fairly simple search
systems on top of these models and get
you into a new region of space. Of
course, you also have to um make sure
that you're not searching that space
totally randomly. It would be too big.
So, you have to have some objective
function that you're trying to optimize
and hill climb towards and that guides
that search. But there's some mechanism
of evolution that are interesting maybe
in the space of programs. But then the
space of programs is an extremely
important space because you can probably
generalize to to everything you know for
example mutation.
So it's not just Monte Carlo tree search
where it's like a search.
>> You could every once in a while
>> combine things. Yeah.
>> Combine things alter like sub like a
components of a thing. Yes. So then you
know what evolution is really good at is
not just the natural selection.
It's combining things and building
increasingly complex hierarchical
systems.
>> So that component is super interesting
especially like with alpha evolve in the
space of programs.
>> Yeah. Exactly. So there's a you can get
a bit of an extra property out of
evolutionary systems which is some new
emergent capability may come about but
of course like happened with life.
Interestingly, with naive uh sort of
traditional evolutionary computing
methods without LLMs and the modern AI,
the problem with them, there was they
were very well studied in the 90s and
and and and early 2000s and some
promising results, but the problem was
they could never work out how to evolve
new properties, new emergent properties.
You always had a sort of subset of the
properties that you put into the system.
But maybe if we combine them with these
foundation models, perhaps we can
overcome that limitation. Obviously uh
natural evolution clearly did because it
it did evolve new capabilities right so
bacteria to where we are now. So clearly
that it must be possible with
evolutionary systems to generate uh new
patterns you know going back to the
first thing we talked about and uh new
capabilities and emergent properties and
maybe we're on the cusp of discovering
how to do that.
>> Yeah listen uh alpha evolve is one of
the coolest things I've ever seen. I've
I've on my desk at home, you know, most
of my time is spent behind that
computers just programming. And next to
the the three screens is a skull of a
tectalic, which is one of the early
organisms that crawled out of the water
onto land. And I just kind of watch that
little guy.
It's like you whatever the computation
mechanism of evolution is is quite
incredible. It's truly truly incredible.
Now whether that's exactly the thing we
need to do to do our search but never
dismiss the power of nature what it did
here.
>> Yeah. And it's amazing um which is a
relatively simple algorithm right
effectively and it can generate all of
this immense complexity emerges
obviously running over you know 4
billion years of time but but it's it's
it's you know you can think about that
as again a pro a search process that ran
over the physics substrate of the
universe for a long amount of
computational time but then it generated
all this incredible uh rich diversity.
>> So uh so many questions I want to ask
you. But one, you do have a dream. One
of the natural systems you want to uh
try to model is a is a cell.
>> Yes,
>> that's a beautiful dream. Uh I could ask
you about that. I also just for that
purpose on the AI scientist front just
broadly. So there's a essay uh from
Daniel Cocatalio, Scott Alexander, and
others that outlines steps along the way
to get to ASI and has a lot of
interesting ideas in it. one of which is
uh including a superhuman coder and a
superhuman AI researcher
and in that there's a term of research
taste that's really interesting. So in
everything you've seen, do you think
it's possible for AI systems to have
research taste to help you in the way
that AI co-scientist does to help steer
human um human brilliant scientists and
then potentially by itself to figure out
what are the directions
where you want to generate truly novel
ideas because that seems to be like a
really important component how to do
great science. Yeah, I think that's
going to be one of the hardest things to
to uh mimic or model is is this this
idea of taste or or judgment. I think
that's what separates the you know the
the great scientists from the good
scientists like all all professional
scientists are good technically right
otherwise they wouldn't have made it
that far in in academia and things like
that but then do you have the taste to
sort of sniff out what the right
direction is what the right experiment
is what the right question is. So the
it's the it's picking the right question
is is the hardest part of science. Um
and and making the right hypothesis and
um that's what you know today's systems
definitely they can't do. So you know I
often say it's harder to come up with a
conjecture a really good conjecture than
it is to solve it. So we may have
systems soon that can solve pretty hard
conjectures. um you know I I um mass
Olympiad problems where we we you know
alpha proof last year our system got you
know silver medal in that really hard
problems maybe eventually we'll be able
to solve a millennium prize kind of
problem but could a system have come up
with a conjecture worthy of study that
someone like Terren Tower would have
gone you know what that's a really deep
question about the nature of maths or
the nature of numbers or the nature of
physics and that is far harder type of
creativity and we don't really Oh,
systems clearly can't do that and we're
not quite sure what that mechanism would
be. This kind of leap of imagination
like like Einstein had when he came up
with, you know, special relativity and
then general relativity with the
knowledge he had at the time.
>> As for conjecture,
the you want to come up with a thing
that's interesting and amenable to
proof.
>> Yes.
>> So like it's easy to come up with a
thing that's extremely difficult.
>> Yeah.
>> It's easy to come up with a thing that's
extremely easy. at that at that very
edge,
>> that sweet spot, right, of of basically
advancing the science and splitting the
hypothesis space into two ideally,
right? Whether if it's true or not true,
you you've learned something really
useful and um and and that's hard and
and and and making something that's also
uh you know falsifiable and within sort
of the technologies that you have you
currently have available. So it's a very
creative process actually highly
creative process that um I think just a
kind of naive search on top of a model
won't be enough for that.
>> Okay. The idea of splitting the
hypothesis space in two is super
interesting. So uh I've heard you say
that there's basically no failure in or
failure is extremely valuable if it's
done if you construct the questions
right if you construct the experiments
right if you design them right that
failure success are both useful. So
perhaps because it splits the hypothesis
basically two, it's like a binary
search.
>> That's right. So when you do like, you
know, real blue sky research, there's no
such thing as failure really as long as
you're picking experiments and
hypotheses that that that that
meaningfully spit the hypothesis space.
So you know, and you learn something,
you can learn something kind of equally
valuable from an experiment that doesn't
work. That should tell you, if you've
designed the experiment well and your
hypothesis are interesting, it should
tell you a lot about where to go next.
and um and then it's you're effectively
doing a search process um and using that
information in in you know very helpful
ways. So to go to your dream
of uh modeling a cell uh what are the
big challenges that lay ahead for us to
make that happen? We should maybe
highlight that alpha I mean there's just
so many leaps.
>> Yeah.
>> So AlphaFold solved if it's fair to say
protein folding and there's so many
incredible things we could talk about
there including the open sourcing uh the
everything you've released. Alpha Fold 3
is doing protein, RNA, DNA interactions,
>> which is super complicated and and
fascinating. That's amendable to
modeling. Alpha genome uh predicts uh
how small genetic changes like if we
think about single mutations, how they
link to actual uh function. So um those
are it seems like it's creeping along to
sophistic to to much more complicated u
things like a cell but a cell has a lot
of really complicated components.
>> Yeah. So what I've tried to do
throughout my career is I have these
really grand dreams and then I try to as
you've noticed and then I try to break
but I try to break them down any you
know it's easy to have a kind of a crazy
ambitious dream but the the the trick is
how do you break it down into manageable
achievable uh interim steps that are
meaningful and useful in their own right
and so virtual cell which is what I call
the project of modeling a cell I've had
this idea you know of wanting to do that
for maybe more like 25 is and I used to
talk with Paul Nurse who is a bit of a
mentor of mine in biology. He runs the
the you know founded the Craig Institute
and and won the Nobel Prize in in 2001.
uh is is we've been talking about it
since you know before the you know in
the '90s and um and I come used to come
back to every 5 years is like what would
you need to model the full internals of
a cell so that you could do experiments
on the virtual cell and what those
experiment you know in silicone and
those predictions would be useful for
you to save you a lot of time in the wet
lab right that would be the dream maybe
you could 100x speed up experiments by
doing most of it in silicone the search
in silicico and then you do the
validation step in the wet lab. That
would be that's the that's the dream.
And so u but maybe now finally uh so I
was trying to build these components
alpha fold being one that that would
allow you eventually to model the full
interaction a full simulation of a cell
and I'd probably start with a yeast cell
and partly that's what Paul nurse
studied because a yeast cell is like a
full organism that's a single cell right
so it's the kind of simplest single cell
organism and so it's not just a cell
it's a full organism and um and yeast is
very well understood And so that would
be a good candidate for uh a a kind of
full simulated model. Now alpha fold is
the is the solution to the kind of
static picture of what does a what does
a protein look 3D structure protein look
like a static picture of it. But we know
that biology all the interesting things
happen with the dynamics the
interactions and that's what alpha 3 is
is the first step towards is modeling
those interactions. So first of all
pairwise you know proteins with proteins
proteins with RNA and DNA but then um
the next step after that would be
modeling maybe a whole pathway maybe
like the to pathway that's involved in
cancer or something like this and then
eventually you might be able to model
you know a whole cell
>> also there's another complexity here
that stuff in a cell happens at
different time scales is that tricky
like there you know protein uh folding
is you know super fast
>> yes
>> um I don't know all the bi ological
mechanisms, but some of them take a long
time. And so is that that's an level. So
the levels of interaction has a
different temporal scale that you have
to be able to model.
>> So that would be hard. So you'd probably
need several simulated systems that can
interact at these different temporal
dynamics or at least maybe it's like a
hierarchical system. So um you can jump
up and down the the different temporal
stages. So can you avoid I mean one of
the challenges here is
not avoid simulating for example the the
the quantum mechanical aspects of any of
this right you want to not overm model
you can skip ahead to just model the
really highlevel things that get you a
really good estimate of what's going to
happen
>> so you you got to make a decision when
you're modeling any natural system what
is the cutoff level of the granularity
that you're going to model it to that
then captures the dynamics that you're
interested in. So probably for a cell I
would hope that would be the protein
level uh and that one wouldn't have to
go down to the atomic level. Um so you
know of course that's where alpha volt
stock kicks in. So that would be kind of
the basis and then you'd build these um
uh higher level simulations that um take
those as building blocks and then you
get the emergent behavior. Apologize for
the pthead questions ahead of time, but
uh will do you think uh we'll be able to
simulate and model the origin of life.
So being able to simulate the first from
from non-living organisms the the birth
of a living organism.
>> I think that's a one of the of course
one of the deepest and most fascinating
questions. Um I love that area of
biology. you know, uh, people like
there's a great book by Nick Lane, one
of the top top experts in this area
called the the 10 great inventions of of
of evolution. I think it's fantastic and
it also speaks to what the great filters
might be, you know, prior or are they
ahead of us. I think I think they're
most likely in the past if you read that
book of how unlikely to go, you know,
have any life at all and then single
cell to multisell seems an unbelievably
big jump that took like a billion years,
I think, on Earth to do, right? So it
shows you how hard it was, right?
>> Bacteria were super happy for a very
long time,
>> a very long time before they captured
mitochondria somehow, right? I don't see
why not why AI couldn't help with that
some kind of simulation. Again, it's
again, it's a bit of a search process
through a combinatorial space. Here's
like all the chem, you know, the
chemical soup that that you start with,
the primordial soup that, you know,
maybe was on Earth near these hot vents.
Here's some initial conditions. Can you
uh generate something that looks like a
cell? So perhaps that would be a next
stage after the virtual cell project is
well how how could you actually um
something like that emerge from the
chemical soup?
>> Well, I would love it if there was a
move 37 for the origin of life. Yeah,
>> I think that's one of the sort of great
mysteries. I think ultimately what we
will figure out is their continuum.
There's no such thing as a line between
non-living and living. But if we can
make that rigorous Yes.
>> that that the very thing from the be big
bang to today has been the same process.
If we can break down that wall that
we've constructed in our minds of the
actual origin of from non-living to
living and it's not a line that it's a
continuum that connects physics and
chemistry and biology. There's no line.
>> I mean this is my whole reason why I've
worked on AI and AGI my whole life
because I think it can be the ultimate
tool to help us answer these kind of
questions. And I don't really understand
why um you know the average person
doesn't think like worry about this
stuff more like how how can we not have
a good definition of life and not and
not living and non-living and the nature
of time and let alone consciousness and
gravity and all these things. It's it's
just and quantum mechanics weirdness.
It's just to me it's I've always had
this sort of screaming at me in my face
the whole and that it's getting louder
you It's like how what is going on here?
You know, in in I mean that in the
deepest sense like in the you know the
nature of reality which has to be the
ultimate question uh that would answer
all of these things. It's sort of crazy
if you think about we can stare at each
other and all these living things all
the time. We can inspect it with
microscopes and take it apart uh almost
down to the atomic level and yet we
still can't answer that clearly in a
simple way that question of how do you
define living?
>> Yeah,
>> it's kind of amazing. Yeah, living you
can kind of talk your way out of
thinking about but like consciousness
like we have this very obviously
subjective conscious experience like
we're at the center of our own world and
it it feels like something and then h
how how are you not screaming
>> at the mystery of it all I mean but
really humans have been contending with
the mystery of the world around them for
long there's a lot of mysteries like
what's up with the sun and and the rain,
>> like what's that about? And then like
last year we had a lot of rain and this
year we don't have rain. Like what did
we do wrong? Humans have been asking
that question for a long time.
>> Exactly. So we're quite I guess we've
developed a lot of mechanisms to cope
with this these deep mysteries that we
can't fully we can see but we can't
fully understand and we have to have to
just get on with daily life and and and
we get we keep ourselves busy right in a
way. Do we keep ourselves distracted?
I mean weather is one of the most
important questions of human history. We
still that's that's the go-to small talk
direction of of the weather
>> especially in England
>> and then it's which is you know famously
is an extremely difficult system to
model and uh even that system uh Google
deep mind has made progress on. Yes,
we've yeah, we've created the the best
weather prediction systems in the world
and they're better than traditional
fluid dynamics sort of systems that
usually calculated on massive
supercomputers takes days to calculate
it. And we've managed to model a lot of
the weather dynamics with neural network
systems with our weather next system.
And again, it's interesting that those
kinds of dynamics can be modeled even
though they're very complicated, almost
bordering on chaotic systems in some
cases. A lot of the interesting aspects
of that um can be modeled by these
neural network systems, including very
recently we had, you know, cyclone
prediction of where, you know, paths of
hurricanes might go. of course super
useful super important for the world and
and and it's super important to do that
very timely and very quickly and as well
as accurately and uh I think it's very
promising direction again of you know
simulating and uh uh so that you can run
forward predictions and simulations of
very complicated real world systems.
>> I should mention that uh I've got a
chance in uh Texas to meet a community
of folks called the stormchasers.
>> Yes. And what's really incredible about
them, I need to talk to them more, is
they're extremely tech-savvy because
what they have to do is they have to use
models to predict where the storm is. So
they're it's just it's it's this
beautiful mix of like crazy enough to
like go into the eye of the storm and
like
>> in order to protect your life and
predict where the extreme events are
going to be, they have to have
increasingly sophisticated models of of
weather.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. It's it's a a beautiful balance of
like being in it as living organisms and
the the cutting edge of science. So they
actually might be using uh deep mind
system. So that's
>> Yeah, they hopefully they are and I I'd
love to join them on one of those
chases. They look amazing, right? To
actually experience it one time.
>> Exactly. And then also to experience the
correct prediction where something will
come and how it's going to evolve. It's
incredible.
>> Yeah.
>> You've estimated that we'll have AGI by
2030.
Um so there's interesting questions
around that. How will we actually know
that we got there? Uh and uh what maybe
the move quote move 37 of AGI.
>> My estimate is sort of 50% chance by in
the next 5 years. So you know by 2030
let's say and uh so I think there's a
good chance that that could happen. Part
of it is what what is your definition of
AGI? Of course, people are arguing about
that now and and uh mine's quite a high
bar and always has been of like can we
match the cognitive functions that the
brain has, right? So, we know our brains
are pretty much general cheuring
machines approximate. And of course,
we've created incredible modern
civilization with our minds. So, that
also speaks to how general the brain is.
And um for us to know we have a true
AGI, we would have to like make sure
that it has all those capabilities. it
isn't kind of a jagged intelligence
where some things it's really good at
like today's systems but other things
it's really uh flawed at and and that's
what we currently have with today's
systems they're not consistent so you'd
want that consistency of intelligence
across the board and then we have some
missing I think capabilities like sort
of uh the true invention capabilities
and creativity that we were talking
about earlier so you'd want to see those
how you test that um I think you just
test it one way to do it would be a kind
of brute force test of tens of thousand
thousand of cognitive tasks that um you
know we know that humans can do uh and
maybe also make the system available to
uh a few hundred of the world's top
experts uh the terren towers of each
each subject area and see if they can
find you know give them give them a
month or two and see if they can find an
obvious flaw in the system and if they
can't then I think you're you're pretty
uh you know pretty you can be pretty
confident we have a a fully general
system
>> maybe to push back a little bit it seems
like humans are really incredible as the
the intelligence improves across all
domains to take it for granted.
>> Mhm.
>> Uh like you mentioned Terrence Tao
uh these brilliant experts they might
quickly in a span of weeks take for
granted all the incredible things it can
do and then focus in well haha right
there. You know I I consider myself uh
first of all human.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh second I identify as human. Um
I you know some people listen to me talk
and they're like that guy is not good at
talking the stuttering the you know so
like even humans have obvious across
domains limits even just outside of
mathematics and physics and so on it I I
I wonder if it will take something like
a move 37 so on the positive side versus
like
>> a barrage of 10,000 cognitive tasks
where it would be one or two where it's
like yes, holy this is
>> I think exactly. So I think there's the
sort of blanket testing to just make
sure you've got the consistency, but I
think there are the sort of lighthouse
moments like the move 37 that I would be
looking for. So one would be inventing a
new conjecture or new hypothesis about
physics like Einstein did. So maybe you
could even run the back test of that
very rigorously like have a cut off of
knowledge cutff of 1900 and then give
the system everything that was you know
that was written up to 1900 and then and
then see if it could come up with
special relativity and general
relativity right like Einstein did that
that would be an interesting test
another one would be can it invent a
game like go not just come up with move
37 a new strategy but can it invent a
game that's as deep as aesthetically
beautiful as elegant as go and those are
the sorts of things I would be looking
out for. Uh and probably a system being
able to do uh uh several of those
things, right, for it to be very
general. Um not just one domain. And so
I think that would be the signs at least
that I would be looking for that we've
got a system that's a GI level. And then
maybe to fill that out, you would also
check the consistency, you know, make
sure there's no holes in that system
either.
>> Yeah. Something like a new conjecture or
scientific discovery. That would be a
cool feeling. Yeah, that would be
amazing. So, it's not not just helping
us do that, but actually coming up with
something brand new
>> and you would be in the room for that.
So, it would be like probably 2 or 3
months before announcing it.
>> Mhm.
>> And you would just be sitting there
trying not to tweet
>> something like that. Exactly. It's like
what is this amazing new you know
physics idea? And then we would probably
check it with world experts in that
domain, right? and validate it and kind
of go through its workings and it I
guess it would be explaining its
workings too. Um yeah be an amazing
moment.
>> Do you worry that we as humans even
expert humans like you might miss it
might miss
>> it may be pretty complicated. So it
could be the analogy I give there is I
don't think it will be um uh uh totally
mysterious to the to the best human
scientists but it may be a bit like for
example in chess if I was to talk to
Gary Kasparov or Magnus Carlson and play
a game with them and they make a
brilliant move I might not be able to
come up with that move but they could
explain why afterwards that move made
sense and we were to understand it to
some degree not to the level they do but
in you know if they were good at
explaining which is actually part of
intellg igence too is being able to
explain in a simple way that what you're
thinking about. Um uh I I think that
that would be very possible for the best
human scientists.
>> But I wonder maybe you can you can
educate me on the side of go. I wonder
if there's moves for Agnes or Gary where
they at first will dismiss it as a bad
move.
>> Yeah, sure. It could be. But then
afterwards they'll figure out with their
intuition that that this why this works.
And then and then and then empirically
the nice thing about games is one of the
great things about games is you can it's
a sort of scientific test. Does it do
you win the game or not win? And then um
that tells you okay that move in the end
was good. That strategy was good. And
then you can go back and analyze that
and and and and explain even to yourself
a little bit more why explore around it.
And that's how chess analysis and things
like that works. So perhaps that's why
my brain works like that cuz I I've been
doing that since I was four and you're
train you know it's sort of hardcore
training in that way. But even even now
like when I generate code
there there is this kind of nuanced
fascinating con contention that's
happening where I might at first
identify as a set of generated code is
incorrect in in some interesting nuanced
ways but then I'm always have to ask the
question is there a deeper insight here
that that I'm the one who's incorrect
>> and that's going to as the systems get
more and more intelligent you're going
to have to contend with that. It's like
what what what do you is this a bug or a
feature of what you just came up with?
>> Yeah. And they're going to be pretty
complicated to do. But of course it will
be you can imagine also AI systems that
are producing that code or whatever that
is and then human programmers looking at
it but also not unaded with the help of
AI tools as well. So it's going to be
kind of an interesting you know maybe
different AI tools to the ones that the
more you know kind of monitoring tools
to the ones that generated it. So if we
look at a AGI system,
sorry to bring it back up, but alpha
evolve,
super cool. So Alpha Evolve enables on
the programming side something like
recursive self-improvement uh
potentially like what who can imagine
what that AGI system maybe not the first
version but a few versions beyond that.
What does that actually look like? Do
you think it would be simple? You think
it'll be something like a self-improving
program in a simple one?
>> I mean, potentially that's possible. I
would say um I'm not sure it's even
desirable because that's a kind of like
hard takeoff scenario. But but you you
these current systems like Alpha Evolve,
they have, you know, human in the loop
deciding on various things. They're
separate hybrid systems that interact.
Uh one could imagine eventually doing
that end to end. I don't see why that
wouldn't be possible but right now um
you know I think the systems are not
good enough to do that in terms of
coming up with the architecture of the
code. Um and again it's a little bit
connected to this idea of coming up with
a new conjectural hypothesis. How like
they're good if you give them very
specific instructions about what you're
trying to do. Um, but if you give them a
very vague high level instruction, that
wouldn't work currently. Like, uh, and I
think that's related to this idea of
like invent a game as good as go, right?
Imagine that was the prompt. That's
that's pretty underspecified. And so the
current systems wouldn't know, I think,
what to do with that, how to narrow that
down to something tractable. And I think
there's similar like, look, just make a
better version of yourself that's too
that's too unconstrained. But we've done
it in, you know, and as you know with
Alpha Evolve, like things like faster
matrix multiplication. So when you when
you hone it down to very specific thing
you want um it's very good at
incrementally improving that but at the
moment these are more like incremental
improvements sort of small iterations
whereas if you know if you wanted a big
leap in uh understanding you need a you
need a much larger uh advance.
>> Yeah. But it could also be sort of to
push back against hard takeoff scenario.
It could be just a sequence of um
incremental improvements like matrix
multiplication like it has to sit there
for days thinking how to incrementally
improve a thing and that it does so
recursively and as you do more and more
improvement it'll slow down so there'll
be like a like uh the path to AGI won't
be like a it'll be a gradual improvement
over time.
>> Yes. If it was just incremental
improvements that's how it would look.
So the question is could it come up with
a new leap like the transformers
architecture right could it have done
that back in 2017 when you know we did
it and brain did it and it's it's not
clear that that these systems something
like Alpha wouldn't be able to do make
such a big leap so for sure these
systems are good we have systems I think
that can do incremental hill climbing
and that's a kind of bigger question
about is that all that's needed from
here or do we actually need one or two
more um uh big breakthroughs
>> and can the same kind of systems provide
the breakthroughs also. So make it a
bunch of scurves like incremental
improvement but also every once in a
while leaps.
>> Yeah. I don't think anyone has systems
that can have shown unequivocally those
big leaps that the the right. We have a
lot of systems that do the hill climbing
of the S-curve that you're currently on.
>> Yeah. And that would be the move 37 is a
leap.
>> Yeah. I think would be a leap. Um
something like that. Uh do you think the
scaling laws are holding strong on the
pre-training, post- training, test time,
compute? Uh do you uh on the flip side
of that anticipate AI progress hitting a
wall?
>> We certainly feel there's a lot more
room just in the scaling. So um actually
all steps pre-training, post-training
and inference time. So uh there's sort
of three scalings that are happening
concurrently. Um and we again there it's
about how innovative you can be and we
you know we pride ourselves on having
the broadest and um deepest research
bench. uh we have amazing you know
incredible uh researchers and uh people
like Nam Shazir who you know came up
with transformers and and Dave Silva you
know who led the Alph Go project and so
on and um it's it's it's that research
base means that if some new new
breakthrough is required like an Alph Go
or Transformers uh I would back us to be
the place that does that. So I'm
actually quite like it when the terrain
gets harder, right? Because then it
veers more from just engineering to to
true research and you know re or
research plus engineering and that's our
sweet spot. And I I think that's harder
it's harder to invent things than to
than to um you know fast follow. And um
so you know we don't know I would say
it's a it's kind of 50/50 whether new
things are needed or whether the scaling
the existing stuff is going to be
enough. And so in true kind of empirical
fashion, we're pushing both of those as
hard as possible. The new blue sky ideas
and you know maybe about half our
resources are on that and then and then
uh scaling to the max the the current
the current capabilities and um we're
still seeing some you know fantastic
progress on uh each different version of
Gemini. That's interesting the way you
put it in terms of the deep bench that
if uh progress towards AGI is more than
just scaling compute so the engineering
side of the problem and is more on the
scientific side where there's
breakthroughs needed then you feel
confident deep mind as well Google deep
mind is well positioned to kick kick ass
in that domain
>> well I mean if you look at the history
of the last decade or 15 years um it's
been I you know maybe I don't know 80
90% of the breakthroughs that that
underpins modern AI field today was from
you know originally Google brain Google
research and deep mind so yeah I would
back that to continue hopefully
>> uh so on the data side are you concerned
about running out of highquality data
especially high quality human data
>> I'm not very worried about that partly
because I think there's enough data uh
or and it's been proven to get the
systems to be pretty good and this goes
back to simulations again if you do you
have enough data to make simulations or
so that you can create more synthetic
data that are from the right
distribution. Obviously, that's the key.
So, you need enough real world data in
order to be able to uh uh create those
kinds of generator data generators and
um I think that we're at that step at
the moment.
>> Yeah, you've done a lot of incredible
stuff on the side of science and biology
doing a lot with not so much data.
>> Yeah.
>> I mean, it's still a lot of data, but I
guess enough
>> take off that going. Exactly. Yeah.
>> So exactly
>> uh how crucial is the scaling of compute
to building AGI? This is a question
that's an engineering question. It's a
almost geopolitical question
>> because it also integrated into that is
the supply chains and energy a thing
that you care a lot about which is um
potentially fusion. So innovating on the
side of energy also. Do you think we're
going to keep scaling compute?
>> I think so for several reasons. I think
compute there's there's the amount of
compute you have for training often it
needs to be colloccated so actually even
like you know uh bandwidth constraints
between data centers can affect that so
it's it's it's there's additional
constraints even there and that that's
important for training obviously the
largest models you can but there's also
because now AI systems are in products
and being used by billions of people
around the world you need a ton of
inference compute now um and then on top
of that there's the thinking systems,
the new paradigm uh of the last year
that uh where they get smarter the
longer amount of inference time you give
them at test time. So all of those
things need a lot of compute and I don't
really see that slowing down. Um and as
AI systems become better, they'll become
more useful and there'll be more demand
for them. So both from the training
side, the training side actually is is
only just one part of that. It may even
become the smaller part of of what's
needed um uh in the overall compute that
that's required. Yeah, that's one sort
of almost memey kind of thing which is
like the success and the incredible
aspects of V3 there people kind of make
fun of like the more successful it
becomes the you know the servers are
sweating.
>> Yes, exactly the difference in
>> Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. We did a little
video of of the servers frying eggs and
things and um that's right and and and
we're going to have to figure out how to
do that. Um there's a lot of interesting
hardware innovations that we do as you
know we have our own TPU line and we're
looking at like inference only things
inference only chips and how we can make
those more efficient. We're also very
interested in building AI systems and we
have done the help with energy usage so
help um data center energy like for the
cooling systems be efficient um grid
optimization
um and then eventually things like
helping with plasma containment fusion
reactors. We've done lots of work on
that with Commonwealth Fusion and also
uh one could imagine reactor design. Um
and then material design I think is one
of the most exciting new types of solar
material solar panel material super room
temperature superconductors has always
been on my list of dream breakthroughs
and um optimal batteries and I think a
solution to any you know one of those
things would be absolutely revolutionary
for you know climate and energy usage
and we're probably close you know again
in the next 5 years to having AI systems
that can materially help with those
problems. If you were to bet, sorry for
the ridiculous question, but what what
is the main source of energy
in like 20, 30, 40 years, do you think
it's going to be nuclear fusion?
>> I think fusion and solar are the two
that I I would bet on. Um solar, I mean,
you know, it's the fusion reactor in the
sky, of course, and I think really the
problem there is is is batteries and
transmission. So you know as well as
more efficient more and more efficient
solar material perhaps eventually you
know in space you know these kind of
Dyson sphere type ideas and fusion I
think is definitely doable seems uh if
we have the right design of reactor and
we can control the plasma and uh fast
enough and so on and I think both of
those things will actually get solved so
we'll probably have at least those will
probably be the two primary sources of
renewable clean almost free or perhaps
free energy What a time to be alive. If
I uh traveled into the future with you
100 years from now, how much would you
be surprised if we've passed a type one
card scale civilization? I would not be
that surprised if there was a like a
100redyear time scale from here. I mean,
I think it's pretty clear if we crack
the energy problems in one of the ways
we've just discussed, fusion or or very
efficient solar, um, then if energy is
kind of free and renewable and clean,
um, then that solves a whole bunch of
other problems. So, for example, the
water access problem goes away because
you can just use desalination. We have
the technology, it's just too expensive.
So, only, you know, fairly wealthy
countries like Singapore and Israel and
so on like actually use it. But but if
it was uh cheap then every then you know
all countries that have a coast could
but also you'd have unlimited rocket
fuel. You could just separate sea water
out into hydrogen and oxygen using
energy and that's rocket fuel. So uh
combined with you know Elon's amazing
self landing rockets then it could be
like you sort of like a bus service to
to space. So that opens up you know
incredible new resources and domains. uh
asteroid mining I think will become a
thing and maximum human flourishing to
the stars. That's what I uh dream about
as well is like Carl Sean's sort of idea
of bringing consciousness to the
universe, waking up the universe. And I
I think human civilization will do that
in the full sense of time if we get AI
right and uh and and and crack some of
these problems with it.
>> Yeah. I wonder what it would look like
if you just a tourist flying through
space. You would probably notice Earth
because if you solve the energy problem,
you would see a lot of space rockets
probably. So it would be like traffic
here in London.
>> But in space,
>> just a lot of rockets
>> and then you would probably see floating
in space some kind of source of energy
like solar.
>> Yeah.
>> Potentially. So earth would just look
more on the surface more um
technological
and then then you would use the power of
that energy then to preserve the natural
>> yes
>> like the rainforest and all that kind of
stuff
>> because for the first time in in human
history we wouldn't be uh resource
constrainted and I think that could be
amazing new era for humanity where it's
not zero sum right I have this land you
don't have it or if we take you know if
the tigers have their forest just then
the the local villagers can't what are
they going to use? I I I think that this
will help a lot. No, it won't solve all
problems because there's still other
human foibless that will will will still
exist, but it will at least remove one I
think one of the big vectors which is
scarcity of resources, you know,
including land and more materials and
energy and um you know, we should be I
sometimes call it like and others call
it about this kind of radical abundance
era where um there's plenty of resources
to go around. But of course the next big
question is making sure that that's
fairly you know shared fairly uh and
everyone in society benefits from that.
So there is something about human nature
where I go you know it's like borat like
my neighbor like I like you start
trouble we we we do start conflicts and
that's why games throughout as I'm
learning actually more and more even in
ancient history serve the purpose of
pushing people away from war actually
hot war so maybe we can figure out
increasingly sophisticated video games
that pull us they that give us that uh
scratch the itch of like conflict,
whatever that is, about us, the human
nature, and then avoid the actual hot
wars that would come with increasingly
sophisticated technologies because we're
now long past the stage where the
weapons we're able to create can
actually just destroy all of human
civilization. So, it's no longer um
that's no longer a great way to to uh
start with your neighbor. It's
better to play a game of chess
>> or football or football. Yeah.
>> And I think I mean I think that's what
my modern sport is. So, and I love
football watching it and and I just feel
like uh and I used to play it a lot as
well and it's it's it's it's very
visceral and it's tribal and I think it
does channel a lot of those energies
into a which I think is a kind of human
need to belong to some some group and um
but into a into a into a fun way, a
healthy way and and a not a not
destructive way kind of constructive uh
thing. And I think going back to games
again is I think they're originally why
they're so great as well for kids to
play things like chess is they're great
little microcosm simulations of the
world. They are simulations of the world
too. They're simplified versions of some
real world situation, whether it's poker
or or go or chess, different aspects or
diplomacy, different aspects of of the
real world. And allows you to practice
at them, too. And and cuz, you know, how
many times do you get to practice a
massive decision moment in your life,
you know, what job to take, what
university to go to, you know, you get
maybe, I don't know, a dozen or so key
decisions one has to make, and you got
to make those as best as you can. Um,
and games is a kind of safe environment,
repeatable environment where you can get
better at your decision- making process.
Um, and it maybe has this additional
benefit of channeling some energies into
uh into more creative and constructive
pursuits.
>> Well, I think it's also really important
to practice um losing and winning,
>> right?
>> Like losing is a really, you know,
that's why I love games. That's why I
love even um things like uh Brazilian
jiu-jitsu.
>> Yeah.
>> Where you can get your ass kicked in a
safe environment over and over. It
reminds you about
>> the way about physics, about the way the
world works, about sometimes you lose,
sometimes you win. You can still be
friends with everybody. But that that
feeling of losing, I mean, it's a weird
one for us humans to like really like
make sense of like that's just part of
life. That is a fundamental part of life
is losing.
>> Yeah. And I think in martial arts as I
understand it, but also in things like
light chess is a at least the way I took
it, it's a lot to do with
self-improvement, self-nowledge. You
know that, okay, so I did this thing.
It's not about really being the other
person. It's about maximizing your own
potential. If you do it in a healthy
way, you learn to use victory and losses
in a way. Don't get carried away with
victory and and think you're the just
the best in the world. Keep and and and
the losses keep you humble and always
knowing there's always something more to
learn. there's always a bigger expert
that you can mentor you, you know, I
think you learn that I'm pretty sure in
martial arts and and and I think that's
also uh the way that at least I was
trained in chess. And so in the same way
and it can be very hardcore and very
important and of course you want to win,
but you also need to learn how to deal
with setbacks in a in a healthy way that
and and and and wire that that feeling
that you have when you lose something
into a constructive thing of next time
I'm going to improve this, right? Or get
better at this. There is something
that's a source of happiness, a source
of meaning, that improvement step. It's
not about the winning or losing.
>> Yes. The mastery. There's nothing more
satisfying in a way is like, "Oh, wow.
This thing I couldn't do before, now I
can." And and and again, games and
physical sports and and mental sports,
they're way they're ways of measuring.
They're beautiful because you can
measure that that progress.
>> Yeah. I mean there's something about
this is why I love role playing games
like the uh number go up of like my on
the skill tree like literally that is a
source of meaning for us humans whatever
our
>> yeah we're quite we're quite addicted to
this sort of yeah these numbers going up
and uh and and and and maybe that's why
we made games like that because
obviously that is something we're we're
hill climbing systems ourselves right
>> yeah it would be quite sad if we didn't
have any mechanism by
>> color belts all of the we do we do this
everywhere right where we just have this
thing that
>> it's and I don't want to dismiss that
that there is a source of deep meaning
for us as humans. U so one of the
incredible stories on the business on
the leadership side is um what Google
has done over the past year. So I uh I
think it's fair to say that Google was
losing on the LLM product side uh a year
ago with Gemini 15 and now it's winning
with Gemini 25 and you took the helm and
you led this effort. What did it take to
go from, let's say, quote unquote losing
to quote unquote winning in the in in
the span of a year?
>> Yeah. Well, firstly, it's absolutely
incredible team that we have, you know,
led by Cory and Jeff Dean and and Oral
and the amazing team we have on Gemini.
Absolutely world class. So, you can't do
it without the best talent. Um, and of
course, you have, you know, we have a
lot of great compute as well. But then
it's the research culture we've created,
right? and basically coming together
both different groups in in Google you
know there was Google brain world-class
team and and then the old deep mind and
pulling together all the best people and
the best ideas and gathering around to
make the absolute greatest system we
could
hard um but we're all very competitive
uh and we you know love research this is
so fun to do um and we you know it's
great to see our trajectory wasn't a
given but we're very pleased with um the
the where we are in the rate of progress
is the most important thing. So if you
look at where we've come two from 2
years ago to one year ago to now you
know I think our we call it relentless
progress along with relentless shipping
of that progress is um being very
successful and you know um it's
unbelievably competitive uh the whole
space the whole AI space with some of
the greatest entrepreneurs and leaders
uh and companies in the world all
competing now because everyone's
realized how important AI is um and it's
very you know been pleasing for us to
see that progress
you know, Google's a gigantic company.
Uh can you speak to the natural things
that happen in that case is the
bureaucracy that emerges like you want
to be careful like you know like that
the natural kind of there's there's
meetings and there's managers and that
like what what are some of the
challenges from a leadership perspective
breaking through that in order to like
you said ship like the the number of
products
>> Gemini related products that's been
shipped over the past year is just
insane
>> right it is yeah exactly that's that's
what relentlessness looks like um I
think it's it's a question of like any
big company you know ends up having uh a
lot of layers of management and things
like that is sort of the nature of how
it works. Um but I still operate and I
was always operating with old Deep Mind
as a as a startup still large one but
still as a startup and that's what we
still act like today as with Google Deep
Mind and acting with decisiveness and
the energy that you get from the best
smaller organizations and we try to get
the best of both worlds where we have
this incredible billions of users
surfaces uh incredible products that we
can power up with our AI and our and our
research. Um, and that's amazing. And
you can, you know, that's very few
places in the world you can get that do
incredible world-class research on the
one hand and then plug it in and improve
billions of people's lives the next day.
Uh, that's a pretty amazing combination.
And we're continually fighting and
cutting away bureaucracy to allow the
research culture and the relentless
shipping culture to flourish. And I
think we've got a pretty good balance
whilst being responsible with it, you
know, as you have to be as a large
company and also uh with a number of,
you know, uh huge product surfaces that
we have.
>> Uh so a funny thing you mentioned about
like the the surface of the billion. I I
had a conversation with a guy named um
brilliant guy uh here at the British
Museum called Irvin Fininkle. He's a
world expert at Kuneaforms, which is a
ancient writing on tablets. and he
doesn't know about Chad GBT or Gemini.
He doesn't even know anything about AI.
But his first encounter with this AI
>> is AI mode on Google. Yes.
>> He's like, "Is that what you're talking
about? This AI mode and you know, it's
just it's just a reminder that there's a
large part of the world that doesn't
know about this AI thing."
>> Yeah. I know. It's funny cuz if you live
on uh X and Twitter and I mean it's sort
of at least my feed it's all AI and and
there's certain places where you know in
the valley and certain pockets where
everyone's just all they're thinking
about is AI but a lot of the normal
world hasn't hasn't come across it yet
but
>> that's a great responsibility to the
their first interaction
>> on the the the grand scale of the rural
India or anywhere across the world like
you get to
>> right and we want it to be as good as
possible and in a lot of cases it's just
under the hood powering making something
like maps or search work better and um
and it's ideally for a lot of those
people should just be seamless. It's
just new technology that makes their
lives more, you know, productive and and
and helps them.
>> A bunch of folks on the Gemini product
and engineering teams spoken extremely
highly of you on another dimension that
I almost didn't even expect cuz I kind
of think of you as the like deep
scientist and caring about these big
research scientific questions. But they
also said you're a great product guy
like how to create a thing that a lot of
people would use and enjoy using. So can
you maybe speak to what it takes to
create a a AI based product that a lot
of people would enjoy using?
>> Yeah. Well, I mean again that comes back
from my game design days where I used to
design games for millions of gamers.
People would forget about that. I've had
experience with cutting edge technology
in product. That that that that is how
games was in the '90s. And so I love
actually the combination of cutting edge
research and then being applied in a
product and to power a new experience.
And so um I think it's the same skill
really of of you know imagining what it
would be like to use it viscerally um
and having good taste. Coming back to
earlier the same thing that's useful in
science um I think is is can also be
useful in in product design. And um I
I've just had a very you know always
been a sort of multi-disiplinary person.
So I don't see uh the boundaries really
between you know arts and sciences or
product and research. It's it's a
continuum for me. I mean I only work on
I like working on products that are
cutting edge. I wouldn't be able to you
know have cutting edge technology under
the hood. I wouldn't be excited about
them if they were just run-of-the-mill
products. Um so it requires this
invention creativity capability. What
are some specific things you kind of
learned about when you um even on the
LLM side, you're interacting with
Gemini, you're like this doesn't feel
like the layout, the the interface,
>> maybe the trade-off between the latency,
like how
>> how to present to the user how long to
wait
>> and how that waiting is shown or the
reasoning capabilities. There's some
interesting things cuz like you said,
it's the very cutting edge. We don't
know
>> how to present it, how to present it
correctly. So is there some specific
things you've you've learned?
>> I mean it's such a fast evolving space.
We're evaluating this all the time, but
where we are today is that you want to
continually simplify things. Um the
whether that's the interface or all the
inter what you build on top of the
model. You kind of want to get out of
the way of the model. The model train is
coming down the track and it's improving
unbelievably fast. This relentless
progress we talked about earlier. You
know, you look at 2.5 versus 1.5 and
it's just a gigantic improvement. And we
expect that again for the future
versions. And so the models are becoming
more capable. So you've got the
interesting thing about the design space
in in in today's world these AI first
products is you got to design not for
what the thing can do today the
technology can do today but in a year's
time. So you actually have to be a very
technical product person because uh you
got to kind of have a good intuition for
and feel for okay that thing that I'm
dreaming about now can't be done today
but is the research track on schedule to
basically intercept that in 6 months or
a year's time. So you kind of got to
intercept where this highly changing
technology is going as well as that um
uh uh new capabilities are coming online
all the time that you didn't realize
before that can allow like D research to
work or now we got video generation what
do we do with that um this multimodal
stuff you know is it one question I have
is is it really going to be the current
UI that we have today these textbox
chats seems very unlikely given once you
think about these super multimodal uh uh
systems Shouldn't it be something more
like Minority Report where you're you're
sort of vibing with it in a in a in a
kind of collaborative way? Right? It
seems very restricted today. I think
we'll look back on today's interfaces
and products and systems as quite
archaic in maybe in just a couple of
years. So I think there's a lot of space
actually for innovation to happen on the
product side as well as the the research
side. And then we're offline talking
about this keyboard is the the open
question is how when and how much will
we move to audio as the primary way of
interacting with the machines around us
versus typing stuff. Yeah, I mean typing
is a very low bandwidth way of doing
even if you're very fast, you know,
typer and I think we're going to have to
start utilizing other devices whether
that's smart glasses, you know, audio,
earbuds, um, and eventually maybe some
sorts of neural devices where we can
increase the the input and the output
bandwidth to something uh, you know,
maybe 100x of what is today.
>> I think that you know underappreciated
art form is the interface design. But I
think you can not unlock the power of
the intelligence of a system if you
don't have the right interface. The
interface is really the way you unlock
its power. It's such an interesting
question of how to do that. So h how
>> you would think like getting out of the
way isn't real art form.
>> Yes. You know, it's the sort of thing
that I guess Steve Jobs always talked
about, right? It's simplicity, beauty,
and elegance that we want, right? And
we're not there. Nobody's there yet in
my opinion. And that's what I would like
us to get to. Again, it sort of speaks
to like Go again, right? As a game, the
most elegant, beautiful game. Can you,
you know, that can you make an interface
as beautiful as that? And actually, I
think we're going to enter an era of AI
generated interfaces that are probably
personalized to you so it fits the way
that you your aesthetic, your feel, the
way that your brain works. And um and
and and the AI kind of generates that
depending on the task. You know, that
feels like that's probably the direction
we'll end up in.
>> Yeah. Because some people are power
users and they want every single
parameter on screen, everything,
everything based like perhaps me with a
key keyboard based navigation. I like to
have shortcuts for everything. And some
people like the minimalism
>> just hide all of that complexity.
Exactly.
>> Yeah. Uh well, I'm glad you have a Steve
Jobs mode in you as well. This is great.
Einstein mode, Steve Jobs mode. Um all
right, let me try to trick you into
answering a question. When when will
Gemini 3 come out? Is it before or after
GTA 6? The world waits for both. And
what does it take to go from 25
to 3 0? Because it seems like there's
been a lot of releases of 25 which are
already leaps in performance.
>> So what what does it even mean to go to
a new version? Is it about performance?
Is this about a completely different
flavor of an experience?
>> Yeah. Well, so the way it works with our
different uh version numbers is we you
know we try to collect so maybe it takes
you know roughly 6 months or something
to to do a new kind of full run and the
full productization of a new version and
during that time lots of new interesting
research iterations and ideas come up
and we sort of collect them all together
that you know you could imagine the last
6 months worth of interesting ideas on
the architecture front uh maybe it's on
on the data front. It's like many
different possible things and we collect
package that all up, test which ones are
likely to be useful for the next
iteration and then bundle that all
together and then we start the new you
know giant hero training run right and
and then uh and then of course that gets
monitored uh and then at the end then
there's the of the pre-training then
there's all the post- training there's
many different ways of doing that
different ways of patching it so there's
a whole experimental phase there which
you can also get a lot of gains out and
that's where you see the version numbers
usually referring to the base model, the
pre-trained model. And then the interim
versions of 2.5, you know, and the
different sizes and the different little
additions, they're often uh patches or
post-training ideas that can be done
afterwards off the same basic
architecture. And then of course on top
of that, we also have different sizes,
pro and flash and flashlight that are
often distilled from the biggest ones,
you know, the flash model from the Pro
model. And that means we have a range of
different choices if you are the
developer of do you want to prioritize
performance or speed right and cost. And
we like to think of this parto frontier
of of you know on the one hand uh the y-
axis is you know like performance and
then the the the x-axis is you know cost
or latency and and speed uh basically
and we we have models that completely
define the frontier. So whatever your
trade-off is that you want as an
individual user or as a as a developer,
you should find one of our models
satisfies that constraint.
>> So behind the version changes, there is
a big hero run.
>> Yes.
>> And then there's uh just an insane
complexity of productization.
Then there's the distillation of the
different sizes along that predator
front. And then as with each step you
take, you realize there might be a cool
product. There's side quests.
>> Yes.
>> Exactly.
>> But and then you also don't want to take
too many side quests because then you
have a million versions of million
products. It's very unclear, but you
also get super excited because it's
super cool. Like how does even you look
at VO
how does it fit into the bigger thing?
>> Exactly. Exactly. And then you're
constantly this process of converging
upstream we call it you know ideas from
the from the product surfaces or or or
from the post training and and even
further downstream than that you you
kind of upstream that into the the core
model training for the next run. Right.
So then the main model the main Gemini
track becomes more and more general and
eventually you know AGI
>> one hero run at a time.
>> Yes. Exactly. A few hero runs later.
>> Uh yeah. So sometimes when you release
these new versions or every version
really
are benchmarks um productive or
counterproductive for showing the
performance of a model you need them and
and but it's important that you don't
overfitit to them right so there
shouldn't be the end the be all and end
all so there's there's lmina or it used
to be calledis that's one of them that
turned out sort of organically to be one
of the the main ways people like to test
these systems at least the chat bots um
obviously there's loads of academic
benchmarks on from from that test
mathematics and coding ability, general
language ability, science ability and so
on. And then we have our own internal
benchmarks that we care about. It's a
kind of multi-objective,
you know, optimization problem, right?
You you don't want to be good at just
one thing. We're trying to build general
systems that are good across the board
and you try and make no regret uh
improvements. though where you're
improving like you know coding uh but it
doesn't reduce your performance in other
areas right so that's the hard part cuz
you you can of course you could put more
coding data in or you could put more um
I don't know gaming data in but then
does it make worse your language uh
system or or uh in your translation
systems and other things that you care
about. So it's you've got to kind of
continually monitor this increasingly
larger and larger suite of of
benchmarks. And also there's uh when you
stick them into products these models
you also care about the direct usage and
the direct stats and the signals that
you're getting from the end users
whether they're coders or or or the
average person using using the chat
interfaces.
>> Yeah. Because ultimately you want to
measure the usefulness but it's so hard
to convert that into a number right.
It's it's really vibe based benchmarks
across a large number of users and it's
hard to know and I it would be just
terrifying to me to you know you have a
much smarter model but it's just
something vibe based. It's not not not
quite working. That's such a scary cuz
and everything you just said it has to
be smart and useful across so many
domains. So you you get super excited
because it's all of a sudden solving
programming problems you've never been
able to solve before.
>> But now it's crappy poetry or something
and it's just I don't know that's a
stressful that's so difficult
>> um to balance and because you can't
really trust the benchmarks you really
have to trust the end users.
>> Yeah. And then other things that are
even more esoteric come into play like
um you know the style of the persona of
the the the system you know how it you
know is it verbose is it succinct is it
humorous you know and and different
people like different things so um you
know it's very interesting it's almost
like cutting edge part of psychology
research or person personality research
you know I used to do that in my PhD
like five factor personality what do we
actually want our assistance to be like
and different people will like different
things as well. So, these are all just
sort of new problems in product space
that I don't think have ever really been
tackled before, but um we're going to
sort of rapidly have to deal with now. I
think is a super fascinating space
developing the character of the thing
and in so doing it puts a mirror to
ourselves what are the kind of things um
that we like cuz prompt engineering
allows you to control a lot of those
elements but can the product
uh make it easier for you to uh control
the different flavors of those
experiences the different characters
that you interact with.
>> Yeah, exactly. So
>> So what's the probability of Google Deep
Mai winning? Well, I don't see it as
sort of winning. I mean, I think we need
to think winning is the wrong way to
look at it given how important and
consequential what it is we're building.
So, funnily enough, I don't I try not to
view it like a game or competition, even
though that's a lot of my mindset. It's
it's about in my view, all of us have
those of us at the leading edge have a
responsibility to um steward this
unbelievable technology that could be
used for incredible good, but also has
risks. um steward it safely into the
world for the benefit of humanity.
That's always um what I've um uh uh I
dreamed about and what we've always
tried to do and I hope that's what
eventually the community maybe the
international community will rally
around when it becomes obvious that as
we get closer and closer to to AGI that
um that's what's needed.
>> I agree with you. I think that's
beautifully put. You've said that um you
talk to and are on good terms with the
leads of some of these uh labs as the
competition heats up. Um how hard is it
to maintain sort of those relationships?
It's been okay so far. I try to pride
myself in being uh collaborative. I'm a
collaborative person. Research is a
collaborative endeavor. Science is a
collaborative endeavor. Right? It's all
good for humanity in the end if you cure
incredible, you know, terrible diseases
and you come with an incredible cure.
this is net win for humanity and the
same with energy. All of the things that
I'm interested in in in helping solve
with AI. So I just want that technology
to exist in the world and be used for
the right things and and and the the
kind of the benefits of that the
productivity benefits of that being
shared for every the benefit of
everyone. So I try to maintain good
relations with all the leading lab uh
people. They have very interesting
characters many of them as you might
expect. Um, but yeah, I'm on good terms.
I I hope with pretty much all of them.
And uh I I think that's going to be
important when when things get even more
serious than they are now. Uh that there
are those communication channels and uh
that's what will facilitate uh
cooperation or collaboration if that's
what is required especially on things
like safety.
>> Yeah, I hope there's some collaboration
on stuff that's uh sort of less high
stakes and in so doing serves as a
mechanism for maintaining friendships
and relationships. So, for example, I
think the internet would love it if you
and Elon somehow collaborated on
creating a video game. That kind of
thing that I think that enables
camaraderie in good terms and also you
two are legit gamers. So, it's just fun
to Yeah.
>> fun to create.
>> Yeah, that would be awesome. And we've
talked about that in the past and it may
be a cool thing that that you know we
can do. And I agree with you. It'd be
nice to have um kind of side projects in
a way where where one can just lean into
the collaboration aspect of it and it's
a sort of uh win-win for both sides and
it's um and it kind of builds up that
that that uh collaborative muscle.
>> I see the scientific endeavor as that
kind of side project for humanity and I
I think deep Google deep mind has been
really pushing that. I would love it if
to see other labs do more scientific
stuff and then collaborate cuz it just
seems like easier to collaborate on the
big scientific questions. I agree and I
would love to see a lot of people a lot
of the other labs talk about science but
I think we're really the only ones using
it for science and doing that and that's
why projects like Alpha Fold are so
important to me and I think to our
mission is to show uh how AI can vis you
know be clearly used in a very concrete
way for the benefit of humanity and and
also we spun out companies like
isomorphic off the back of Alphafold to
do drug discovery and it's going really
well and build sort of you know you can
think of build additional alpha fold
type type systems to go into chemistry
space to help accelerate drug design and
the examples I think we need to show uh
and society needs to understand what AI
can bring these huge benefits.
>> Well, from the bottom of my heart, thank
you for pushing the scientific efforts
forward wi with rigor, with fun, with
humility, all of it. I just love to see
and still talking about P equals NP. I
mean, it's just incredible. So, I love
it. Uh there there's been uh seemingly a
war for talent. Some of it is meme, I
don't know. Um, what do you think about
Meta buying up talent with huge salaries
and and the heating up of this battle
for talent? And I I should say that I
think a lot of people see Deep Mind is a
really great place to do uh cutting edge
work for the reasons that you've
outlined is like there's this vibrant
scientific culture.
>> Yeah. Well, look, of course, um, you
know, there's a strategy that that Meta
is taking right now. I think that um
from my perspective at least I think the
people that are real uh believers in the
mission of AGI and what it can do and
understand the real consequences both
good and bad from that and what's what
that responsibility entails I think
they're mostly doing it to be like
myself to be on the frontier of that
research so you know they can help
influence the way that goes and steward
that technology safely into the world
and you know meta right now are not at
the frontier maybe they'll they'll
manage to get back on there and um you
know it's probably rational what they're
doing from their perspective because
they're behind and they need to do
something but I think um there's more
important things than than just money.
Of course one has to pay you know people
their market rates and all of these
things and that continues to go up. Um
but as pro and and and I was expecting
this because more and more people are
finally realizing leaders of companies
what I've always known for 30 plus years
now which is that AGI is the most
important technology probably that's
ever going to be invented. So in some
senses it's it's rational to be doing
that. But I also think there's a much
bigger question. I mean people in AI
these days are very well paid. You know
I I remember when we were starting out
back in 2010 you know I didn't even pay
myself for a couple of years because
wasn't enough money. We couldn't raise
any money. And these days interns are
being paid you know the amount that we
raised as our first entire seed round.
So it's pretty funny. And I remember the
days where we used I used to have to to
work for free and and almost pay my own
way to do an internship. right now it's
all the other way around but that's just
how it is. it's the new world and um but
I think that you know we've been
discussing like what happens post AGI
and energy systems are solved and so on
what is even money going to mean so I
think uh you know and the economy and
and we're going to have much bigger
issues to work through and how does the
economy function in that world and
companies so I think you know it's a
little bit of a side issue about uh uh
salaries and things of like that today
>> yeah when you're facing such gigantic
consequences and and gigantic
fascinating scientific questions
>> which maybe only a few years away. So,
>> so on the practical pragmatic sense, if
we zoom in on jobs, we can look at
programmers because it seems like AI
systems are currently doing incredibly
well in programming and increasingly so.
So, a lot of people that uh program for
a living, love programming, are worried
they will lose their jobs. How worried
should they be, do you think? and what's
the right way to uh sort of adjust to
the new reality and ensure that you
survive and thrive as a human in the
programming world.
>> Well, it's interesting that programming
and it's again counterintuitive to what
we thought years ago maybe that some of
the skills that we think of as harder
skills are turned out maybe to be the
easier ones for various reasons but you
know coding and math because you can
create a lot of synthetic data and
verify if that data is correct. So
because of that nature of that it's
easier to make things like synthetic
data to train from. Um it's also an area
of course we're all interested in
because as programmers right to help us
and get faster at it and more
productive. So I think the for the next
era like the next 5 10 years I think
what we're going to find is people who
are kind of embrace these technologies
become almost at one with them um
whether that's in the creative
industries or the technical industries
will become sort of superhumanly
productive I think. So the great
programmers will be even better but
they'll be even 10x even what they are
today and because there you'll be able
to use their skills to utilize the the
tools to the maximum uh you exploit them
to the maximum and um so I think that's
what we're going to see in the next
domain um so that's going to cause quite
a lot of change right and so that's
coming a lot of people benefit from that
so I think one example of that is if
coding becomes easier um it becomes
available to many more creatives to do
more uh and uh but I think the top
programmers will still have huge
advantages as terms of specifying going
back to specifying what the architecture
should be the question should be how to
guide these um uh coding assistants in a
way that's useful and you know check
whether the code they produce is good so
I think there's plenty of um uh headroom
there for the foreseeable you know next
few years
>> so I think there's there's several
interesting things there one is there's
a lot of imperative to just get better
and better consistently of using these
tools. So they they're riding the wave
of the improvement improving models.
>> Yes.
>> Versus like competing against them.
>> But sadly, but that's the the nature of
of life on earth. Um there could be a
huge amount of value to certain kinds of
programming at the cutting edge and less
value to other kinds. For example, it
could be like, you know, front end
>> web design might uh be more amendable to
to to as as you mentioned to generation
>> uh by AI systems and maybe for example
game engine design or something like
this or backhand design or or guiding
systems in high performance situations,
high performance programming type of
design decisions that might be extremely
valuable. But it it will shift where the
humans are needed most and that's scary
for people to adjust. I can I think
that's right that the any time where
there's a lot of disruption and change
you know and we've had this it's not
just this time we've had this in many
times in human history with the internet
u mobile but before that obviously
industrial revolution um and it's going
to be one of those eras where there will
be a lot of change I think there'll be
new jobs we can't even imagine today
just like the internet created and then
those people with the right skill sets
to ride that wave will become incredibly
uh valuable right those skills but maybe
people will have to relearn or adapt a
bit uh their current skills. And it's
the the thing that's going to be harder
to deal with this time around is that I
think what we're going to see is
something like probably 10 times the
impact the industrial revolution had and
but 10 times faster as well. Right? So
instead of 100 years, it takes 10 years.
And so that's going to make it, you
know, it's like a 100x uh the impact and
the speed combined. So that's what's I
think going to make it more difficult
for society to to to deal with and it's
there's a lot to think through and I
think we need to be discussing that
right now and I I you know I encourage
top economists in the world and
philosophers to start thinking about um
uh how should is society going to be
affected by this and what should we do
including things like um you know
universal basic provision or something
like that where a lot of the um
increased productivity
uh gets shared out and distributed uh to
society um and maybe in the form of
surface services and other things where
if you want more than that you still go
and get some incredibly rare skills and
things like that um and and make
yourself unique. Um but uh uh but
there's a basic provision that is
provided
>> and if you think of government as a
technology there's also interesting
questions not just in economics but just
politics. How do you design a system
that's responding to the rapidly
changing times such that you can
represent the different pain that people
feel from the different groups? And how
do you reallocate resources in a way
that um addresses that pain and
represents the hope and the pain and the
fears of different people uh in a way
that doesn't lead to division because
politicians are often really good at
sort of fueling the division and using
that to get elected the other
defining the other and then saying
that's bad and sort of based on that
>> I think that's often counterproductive
ive to leveraging a rapidly changing
technology how to help the world
flourish. So we almost need to improve
our political systems as well rapidly if
you think of them as a technology
>> definitely and I think I think we'll
need new governance structures
institutions probably to help with this
transition. So I think political
philosophy and political science is
going to be key uh to that. But I think
the number one thing first of all is to
create more abundance of resources right
then there's the so that's the number
one thing increase productivity get more
resources maybe eventually get out of
the zero sum situation then the second
question is how to use uh those
resources and distribute those resources
but yeah you can't do that without
having that abundance first. Uh you
mentioned to me uh the book the maniac
uh by Benjamin Levitut a book on uh
first of all about you there's a bio
about you um strange yeah
>> it's unclear yeah sure it's unclear how
much is fiction how much is reality um
but I think the central figure that is
John vonman I would say it's a haunting
and beautiful exploration of madness and
genius and let's say the double-edged uh
sword of discovery
And you know for um people who don't
know John vonman is a kind of legendary
mind. He contributed to quantum
mechanics. He was on the Manhattan
project. He is widely considered to be
the father of or pioneer the modern
computer and AI and so on. So as many
people say he's like one of the smartest
humans ever. So it's just fascinating.
And what's also fascinating is as a
person who saw nuclear science and
physics become the atomic bomb. So you
you got to see ideas become a thing that
has a huge amount of impact on the
world. He also foresaw the same thing
for computing.
>> Yeah.
>> He he and that's the a little bit again
beautiful and haunting aspect of the
book. um than taking a leap forward and
looking at this at least at all alpha
zero alpha go alpha zero big moment that
maybe John vonman's
thinking was brought to to to to
reality. So I I I guess the question is
um what do you think if you got to hang
out with John Noman now? What what would
he say about what's going on?
>> Well, that would be an amazing
experience. you know, he's a fantastic
mind and and I also love the where he he
spent a lot of his time at Princeton at
the Institute of Advanced Studies, a
very special place for thinking and um
it's amazing how much of a polymath he
was in the the spread of things he
helped invent including of course the
vonoyman architecture that all the
modern computers are based on. And um he
had amazing foresight. I think he would
have loved where we are today and he
would have um I think he would have
really enjoyed Alph Go being you know
games he also did game theory. I think
he foresaw a lot of what would happen
with learning machines systems that that
that are kind of grown I think he called
it rather than programmed. I'm not sure
how even maybe he wouldn't even be that
surprised this the fruition of what I
think he already foresaw in the 1950s.
>> I wonder what advice he would give. You
got to see the building of the atomic
bomb with the Manhattan project. I'm
sure there's
>> interesting stuff that maybe is not
talked about enough. Maybe some
bureaucratic aspect, maybe the influence
of politicians, maybe
>> maybe not enough of picking up the phone
and talking to people that are called
enemies by the said politicians. There
might be some like deep wisdom that we
just may have lost from that time
actually.
>> Yeah, I'm sure. I'm sure there is. I
mean, I've we we you know studied I read
a lot of books for that time as well.
chronicle time um and some brilliant
people involved. I I agree with you. I
think maybe there needs to be more
dialogue and understanding. Um I hope we
can learn from those those times. I
think the difference here is that the AI
has so many it's a multi-use technology
obviously we're trying to do things like
that like solve you know all diseases um
uh help with energy uh and scarcity
these incredible things. This is why all
of us and and myself, you know, I worked
started on this journey 30 plus years
ago. And um but of course there are
risks too and probably vonoman my guess
is he foraw both and um and I think he
sort of said I think is to his wife that
that that it would be this is computers
would be even more impactful in the
world and as we just discussed you know
I think that's right. I think it's going
to be 10 times at least of the
industrial revolution. So I think he's
right. So I think he would have been I
imagine fascinated by uh uh uh where we
are now.
>> And I think one of the maybe you can
correct me but one of the takeaways from
the book is that reason as uh said in
the book mad dreams of reason. It's not
enough for guiding humanity as we build
these super powerful technology that
there's something else. I mean there's
also like a religious component.
Whatever God, whatever religion gives it
G, it pulls at us something in the human
spirit that raw cold reason doesn't give
us.
>> And I I agree with that. I think we need
to approach it with whatever you want to
call it, the a spiritual dimension or
humanist dimension. Doesn't have to be
to do with religion, right? But this
idea of of a soul, what makes us human,
this spark that we have perhaps is to do
with consciousness when we finally
understand that. Um, I think that has to
be at the heart of the endeavor. Um, and
technology, I've always seen technology
as the enabler, right? The tools that
that enable us to to flourish and to
understand more about the the world. And
I I'm sort of with Fman on this, and he
used to always talk about science and
art being companions, right? You can
understand it from both sides, the
beauty of a flower, how beautiful it is,
and also understand why the colors of
the flower evolved like that, right?
That just makes it more beautiful, the
the the just the intrinsic beauty of the
flower. And and I've always sort of seen
it like that. And maybe you know in the
renaissance times the great discoverers
then like people like Da Vinci you know
they were I don't think he saw any
difference between science and art uh
and perhaps religion right they were
everything was it's just part of being
human and um being inspired about the
world around us and that's what I the
philosophy I tried to take and u one of
my favorite philosophers is Spininoza
and I think he combined that all very
well you know this idea of trying to
understand the universe and
understanding our place in it and that
was his kind of way of understanding
religion and I think that's quite
beautiful and for me every all of these
things are related interrelated the
technology and um what it means to be
human and uh I think it's very important
though that we remember that as when
we're immersed in the technology and the
the research I think a lot of
researchers that I see in in our field
are a little bit too narrow and only
understand the technology and I think
also that's why it's important important
for this to be debated by society at
large and I'm very supportive of things
like this the AI summits that will
happen and governments understanding it
and I think that's one good thing about
the chatbot era and the product era of
AI is that everyday person can actually
feel and and interact with cutting edge
AI and and and feel feel it for
themselves.
>> Yeah. Because they they force the
technologist to have the human
conversation. Yeah, for sure. That's the
hopeful aspect of it. Like you said,
it's a dual use technology that we're
forcefully integrating the entire of
humanity into it by into the discussion
about AI because ultimately AI AGI will
be used for the things that states use
technologies for which is uh conflict
and so on. And the more we uh integrate
humans into this picture by having chats
with them, the more it will guide
>> Yeah. be able to adapt. society will be
able to adapt to these technologies like
we've always done in the past with with
uh the incredible technologies we've
invented in the past.
>> Do you think there will be something
like a Manhattan project
where
um there will be an escalation of the
power of this technology and states in
their old way of thinking will try to
use it as weapons technologies and there
will be this kind of escalation.
>> I hope not. Um I think that would be uh
very dangerous to do and I think also um
you know not the right use of the
technology. I I hope we'll end up with
more something more collaborative if
needed like more like a like a CERN
project you know where um it's research
focused and the best minds in the world
come together to carefully complete the
final steps and make sure it's
responsibly done before you know like
deploying it to the world. We'll see. I
mean it's difficult with the current
geopolitical climate I think uh to to
see cooperation but things can change
and um I think at least on the
scientific level it's important for the
researchers to to to to keep in touch
and and and keep close to each other on
at least on those kinds of topics.
>> Yeah. And I I personally believe on the
education side and um immigration side,
it would be great if both directions uh
people from the west immigrated to China
and China back. I mean there is some
like family human aspect of people just
intermixing.
>> Yeah.
>> And thereby those ties grow strong. So
you can't sort of divide against each
other this kind of old school way of
thinking. And so uh multi- uh
multicultural multid-disciplinary
research teams working on scientific
questions. That's like the hope. Don't
don't let the the warm leaders that are
warmongers because it divide us. I think
science is the ultimately really
beautiful connector.
>> Yeah. Science has always been uh I think
quite a a very collaborative endeavor
and you know scientists know that it's
it's a it's a collective endeavor as
well and we can all learn from each
other. So perhaps it could be a vector
to get a bit of cooperation. What's your
uh ridiculous question? What's your
pdoom? Probability the human
civilization destroys itself.
>> Well, look, I I don't have a
it's a you know, I don't have a pdoom
number. The reason I don't is because I
think it's would imply a level of
precision that is not there. So, like I
don't know how people are getting their
poom numbers. I think it's a kind of a
little bit of a ridiculous notion
because um what I would say is it's
definitely nonzero and it's probably non
negligible. So that in itself is pretty
sobering and my my view is it's just
hugely uncertain, right? What these
technologies are going to be able to do,
how fast are they going to take off, how
controllable they going to be. Some
things may turn out to be and hopefully
like way easier than we thought, right?
Um but it may be there's some really
hard um uh uh problems that are harder
than we guess today and I think uh we
don't know that for sure and so in under
those conditions of a lot of uncertainty
but huge stakes both ways you know on
the one hand we we could solve all
diseases energy problems the not the the
the scarcity problem and then travel to
the stars and conscious of the stars and
maximum human flourishing on the other
hand is this sort of p doom scenarios so
given the uncertainty around it and the
importance of It's clear to me the only
rational sensible approach is to proceed
with cautious optimism. So we want the
outcome. We want the um uh the benefits
of course uh and uh all of the the
amazing things that AI can bring and
actually I would be really worried for
humanity if I if given the other
challenges that we have climate dis you
know aging uh resources all of that if I
didn't know something like AI was coming
down the line right how would we solve
all those other problems I think it's
hard um so I think we've you know it
could be amazingly transformative for
good um but on the other And you know
there are these risks that we know are
there but we can't quite quantify. So
the the best thing to do is to use the
scientific method to do more research to
try and uh more precisely define those
risks and of course address them. Um and
I think that's what we're doing. I think
there probably needs to be uh 10 times
more effort on that than there is now as
we're getting closer and closer to the
to the to the AGI line.
>> What would be the source of worry for
you more? Would it be human caused or AI
AGI caused?
>> Humans abusing that technology versus
AGI itself through mechanism that you've
spoken about which is fascinating
deception or this kind of stuff
>> getting better and better and better
secretly and then
>> I think they they operate over different
time scales and they're equally
important to address. So there's just
the the the the common garden of variety
of like you know bad actors using new
technology uh in this case general
purpose technology and repurposing it
for harmful ends and that's a huge uh
risk and I think that has a lot of
complications because generally you know
I'm in huge favor of open science and
open source and in fact we did it with
all our science projects like AlphaFold
and all of those things uh for the
benefit of of of the scientific
community. Um but how does one restrict
bad actors access access to these
powerful systems whether they're
individuals or even rogue states uh and
but enable access at the same time to
good actors to to maximally build on top
of. It's pretty tricky problem that
there's I've not heard a clear solution
to. So there's the bad actor use case
problem and then there's obviously uh as
the systems become more agentic and and
closer to AGI um and more autonomous how
do we ensure the guard rails and they
stick to what we want them to do uh and
under our control. Yeah, I tend to maybe
on my mind is limited worry more about
the humans. So the bad actors
>> and there it could be uh in part how do
you not put destructive technology in
the hands of bad actors but in another
part from again geopolitical technology
perspective how do you reduce the number
of bad actors in the world that's that's
also an interesting human problem.
>> Yeah it's a hard problem. I mean, look,
we we we can um maybe also use the
technology itself to help um
early warning on some of the bad actor
use cases, right? Whether that's bio or
nuclear or whatever it is, like AI could
be potentially helpful there as long as
the AI that you're using is itself
reliable, right? So it's a sort of
interlocking problem and that's what
makes it very tricky and and again it
may require some agreement
internationally at least between China
and the and and the US of of of some uh
basic standards right I have to ask you
about the the book the maniac there
there's this the the hand of God moment
Lisa doll's move 78
>> that perhaps the last time a human did a
move of sort of pure human genius and
beat Alph Go or like broke its brain if
sorry to anthropomorphize but it's an
interesting moment cuz I think in so
many domains it will keep happening.
>> Yeah, it's a special moment and you know
it was great for Lisa Doll and you know
I think it's in a way they were kind of
inspiring each other. We as a team were
inspired by Lisa Doll's brilliance and
nobleness and then maybe he got inspired
by you know what AlphaGo was doing to
then conjure this incredible
inspirational moment. it's all you know
captured very well in the in the
documentary about it and um I think
that'll continue in many domains where
there's this at least for the for the
again for the foreseeable uh future of
like the humans bringing in their
ingenuity um and asking the right
question let's say uh and then utilizing
these tools uh in a way that um then
cracks a problem.
>> Yeah. What as the AI becomes smarter and
smarter, one of the interesting
questions we can ask ourselves is what
makes humans special? It does feel I'm
perhaps biased that we humans are deeply
special. I don't know if it's our
intelligence.
It could be something else that that
other thing that's outside the mad
dreams of reason. I think that's what
I've always imagined uh when I was a kid
and starting on this journey of like um
I was of course fascinated by things
like consciousness did did a
neuroscience PhD to look at how the
brain works especially imagination and
memory I focused on the hippocampus and
it's sort of going to be interesting I
always thought the best way of course
one can kind of philosophize about it
and have thought experiments and maybe
even do actual experiments like you do
in neuroscience on on real brains but in
the end I always imagined that building
AI a kind intelligent artifact and then
comparing that to the human mind and
seeing what the differences were uh
would be the best way to uncover what's
special about the human mind if indeed
there is anything special and I suspect
there probably is but it's going to be
hard to def you know I think this
journey we're on will help us uh
understand that and define that and you
know there may be a difference between
carbon based substrates that we are and
silicon ones when they process
information you know one of the best
definitions I like of of of
consciousness is it's the information
feels when we process it, right? Um, it
could be I mean doesn't it's not a very
helpful scientific explanation. I think
it's kind of interesting intuition in
intuitive one and um and so you know on
this this this journey this scientific
journey we're on will I think um help
uncover that mystery.
>> Yeah. What I cannot create I do not
understand. That's uh somebody you
deeply admire Richard Feman like you
mentioned. you also reach um for the the
Wignner's dreams of universality that he
saw in constraint domains but also
broadly generally in in mathematics and
so on. So so many aspects on which
you're pushing towards
>> not to start trouble at the end but uh
Roger Penrose.
>> Yes.
>> Okay.
So uh you know do do you think
consciousness there's this hard problem
of consciousness how information feels
>> um do you think consciousness first of
all is a computation and if it is if
it's information processing like you
said everything is
>> is it something that could be modeled by
a classical computer?
>> Yeah.
>> Or is it a quantum mechanical in nature?
Well, look, Pero is an amazing thinker,
one of the greatest of the modern era,
and he we've had a lot of discussions
about this. Of course, we cordily
disagree, which is, you know, I I feel
like um I mean, he collaborated with a
lot of good neuroscientists to see if he
could find mechanisms for quantum
mechanics behavior in the brain. And
they, to my knowledge, they haven't
found anything um convincing yet. So my
betting is there is is that that that
it's mostly you know it is just
classical computing that's going on in
the brain which suggests that all the
phenomena uh are modelable or mimickable
by a classical computer but we'll see
you know there may be this final
mysterious things of the feeling of
consciousness the qualia these kinds of
things that philosophers debate where
it's unique to the substrate we may even
come towards understanding that when if
we do things like neural link and and
have neural interfaces to the AI
systems, which I think we probably will
eventually um maybe to keep up with the
AI systems. Uh we might actually be able
to feel for ourselves what it's like to
compute on silicon, right? So um and
maybe that will tell us. Uh so I think
it's it's going to be interesting. I had
a debate once with the late Daniel
Dennett about why do we think each other
are conscious? Okay, so it's for two
reasons. One is you're exhibiting the
same behavior that I am. So that's one
thing. behaviorally you seem like a
conscious being if I am. But the second
thing which is often overlooked is that
we're running on the same substrate. So
if you're behaving in the same way and
we're running on the same substrate,
it's most parsimonious to assume you're
feeling the same experience that I'm
feeling. But with an AI uh that's on
silicon, we won't be able to rely on the
second part. Even if it exhibits the
first part, the behavior looks like a
behavior of a conscious being. It might
even claim it is. Um but we but but we
wouldn't know how it actually felt. Um
and it probably couldn't know we what we
felt at least in the first stages. Maybe
when we get to super intelligence and
the technologies that builds perhaps
we'll we'll be able to um bridge that.
>> No, I mean that's a huge test for
radical empathy is to empathize with a
different substrate.
>> Right. Exactly. We never had to confront
that before.
>> Yeah. So maybe maybe through brain
computer interfaces be able to truly
empathize what it feels like to be a
computer
>> for information to be computed not on a
carbon system. I mean that's deeply I
mean some people kind of think about
that with plants with other life forms
which are different similar substrate
but sufficiently far enough on the uh
evolutionary tree
>> that it's requires a radical empathy but
to do that with a computer
>> I mean Lou we sort of there are animal
studies on this of like of course higher
animals like you know killer whales and
dolphins and dogs and and monkeys you
know they have some and elephants you
know they have some aspects certainly of
consciousness right? Even though they're
not might not be that that that smart on
an IQ sense. So so we can already
empathize with that and maybe even some
of our systems one day like we built
this thing called dolphin Gemma, you
know, which can one a version of our
system was trained on dolphin and whale
sounds and maybe we'll be able to build
a an interpreter or translator at some
point which should be pretty cool.
>> What gives you hope for the future of
human civilization?
>> Well, what gives me hope is I think our
almost limitless ingenuity first of all.
I think the best of us and the best
human minds are incredible. Um, and you
know, I love, you know, meeting and
watching any human that's the top of
their game, whether that's sport or
science or art. You know, it's it's it's
just nothing more wonderful than that,
seeing them in their element in flow.
Um, I think it's almost limitless. You
know, our brains are general systems,
intelligent systems. So, I think it's
almost limitless what we can potentially
do with them. And then the other thing
is our extreme adaptability. I think
it's going to be okay in terms of
there's going to be a lot of change. But
but look where we are now with our
effectively our hunter gatherer brains.
How is it we can you know we can cope
with the modern world, right? Flying on
planes, doing podcasts, you know,
playing computer games and virtual
simulations. I mean, it's already given
that was developed for, you know,
hunting buffal
[Music]
societyy's already adapted to this
mind-blowing AI technology we have today
already. It's like, oh, I talk to chat
bots. It's totally fine.
>> And it's uh very possible that this very
podcast activity, which I'm here for,
will be completely replaced by AI. I'm
very replaceable and I'm waiting for
>> not to the level that you can do it,
Lex. So don't think
>> Thank you. That's that's what we humans
do to each other. We compliment.
>> All right. And uh I'm uh deeply grateful
for us humans to have this uh infinite
capacity for curiosity, adaptability,
like you said, and also compassion and
ability to love.
>> Exactly.
>> All of those human
>> all the things that are deeply human.
>> Well, this is a huge honor, Demis.
You're one of the truly special humans
in the world. Uh thank you so much for
doing what you do and for talking today.
>> Well, thank you very much, Lex.
Thanks for listening to this
conversation with Demos. To support this
podcast, please check out our sponsors
in the description and consider
subscribing to this channel.
And now, let me answer some questions
and try to articulate some things I've
been thinking about. If you would like
to submit questions, including in audio
and video form, go to lexfreman.com/am.
I got a lot of amazing questions,
thoughts, and requests from folks. I'll
keep trying to pick some uh randomly and
comment on it at the end of every
episode. I got a note on May 21st this
year that said, "Hi, Lux. 20 years ago
today, David Foster Wallace delivered
his famous this is water speech at uh
Kenyan College. What do you think of
this speech?"
Well, first I think this is probably one
of the greatest and most unique
commencement speeches ever given. But of
course, I have many favorites, including
the one by Steve Jobs. And David Foster
Wallace is one of my favorite writers
and one of my favorite humans.
There's a tragic honesty to his work.
And it always felt as if he was engaging
in a a constant battle with his own
mind. and the writing, his writing were
kind of his notes from the front lines
of that battle.
Now, onto the speech. Let me quote some
parts. There's of course the parable of
the fish and the water that goes, "There
are these two young fish swimming along,
and they happen to meet an older fish
swimming the other way who nods at them
and says, "Morning boys. How's the
water?"
And the two young fish swim on for a bit
and then eventually one of them looks
over at the other and goes, "What the
hell is water?"
In the speech, David Foster Wallace goes
on to say, "The point of the fish story
is merely that the most obvious
important realities are often the ones
that are hardest to see and talk about."
stated as an English sentence. Of
course, this is just a banal platitude.
But the fact is that in the dayto-day
trenches of adult existence, bal
platitudes can have a life or death
importance. Or so I wish to suggest to
you in this dry and lovely morning. I
have several takeaways from this parable
and the speech that follows. First, I
think we must question everything and in
particular the most basic assumptions
about our reality, our life and the very
nature of existence and that this
project is a deeply personal one in some
fundamental sense. Nobody can really
help you in this process of discovery.
The call to action here, I think, from
uh David Foster Wallace, as he puts it,
is to quote, to be just a little less
arrogant, to have just a little more
critical awareness about myself and my
certainties.
Because a huge percentage of the stuff
that I tend to be automatically certain
of is, it turns out, totally wrong and
deluded.
All right, back to me. Lex speaking.
Second takeaway is that the central
spiritual battles of our life are not
fought on a uh mountain top somewhere at
a meditation retreat but it is fought in
the mundane moments of daily life.
Third takeaway is that we too easily
give away our time and attention to the
multitude of distractions that the world
feeds us. the insatiable black holes of
attention.
David Foster Wallace's call to action in
this case is to be deeply aware of the
beauty in each moment and to find
meaning in the mundane.
I often quote David Foster Wallace in
his advice that the key to life is to be
unorable.
And I think this is exactly right. Every
moment, every object, every experience
when looked at closely enough contains
within it infinite richness to explore.
And since uh Deus Lasabus of this very
podcast episode and I are such fans of
Richard Feineman, allow me to uh also
quote Mr. Fineman on this topic as well.
quote, "I have a friend who's an artist
and has sometimes taken a view which I
don't agree with very well. He'll hold
up a flower and say, "Look how beautiful
it is." And I'll agree. Then he says,
"I, as an artist, can see how beautiful
this is, but you as a scientist take
this all apart and it becomes a dull
thing." And I think that's kind of
nutty.
First of all, the beauty that he sees is
available to other people and to me too,
I believe. Although I may not be quite
as refined aesthetically as he is, I can
appreciate the beauty of a flower. At
the same time, I see much more about the
flower than he sees. I can imagine the
cells in there, the complicated actions
inside which also have beauty. I mean
it's not just beauty at this dimension
at 1 cm. There's also beauty at the
smaller dimensions. The inner structure
also the processes. The fact that the
colors in the flower evolved in order to
attract insects to pollinate it is
interesting. It means that the insects
can see the color. It adds a question.
Does this aesthetic sense also exist in
lower forms? Why is it aesthetic? all
kinds of interesting questions which the
science knowledge only adds to the
excitement, the mystery and the awe of a
flower. It only adds
all right back to uh David Foster
Wallace's speech. He has a great story
in there that I particularly enjoy.
It goes, "There are these two guys
sitting together in a bar in the remote
Alaskan wilderness. One of the guys is
religious. The other is an atheist and
the two are arguing about the existence
of God with that special intensity that
comes after about the fourth beer. And
the atheist says, "Look, it's not like I
don't have actual reasons for not
believing in God. It's not like I
haven't ever experimented with the whole
God and prayer thing. Just last month, I
got caught away from the camp in that
terrible blizzard and I was totally lost
and I couldn't see a thing and it was 50
below. And so I tried it. I fell to my
knees in the snow and cried out, "Oh
God, if there is a God, I'm lost in this
blizzard and I'm going to die if you
don't help me."
And now back in the bar, the religious
guy looks at the atheist all puzzled.
"Well, then you must believe now," he
says. After all, there you are alive.
The atheist just rolls his eyes. No,
man. All that happened was a couple of
Eskimos happened to be wandering by and
show me the way back to the camp.
All this, I think, teaches us that
everything is a matter of perspective
and that wisdom may arrive if we have
the humility to keep shifting and
expanding our perspective on the world.
Thank you for allowing me to talk a bit
about David Foster Wallace. He's one of
my favorite writers and he's a beautiful
soul.
If I may, one more thing I wanted to
briefly comment on. I found myself to be
in this strange position of getting
attacked online often from all sides,
including being lied about sometimes
through selective misrepresentation, but
often through downright lies. I don't
know how else to put it. This all breaks
my heart, frankly, but I've come to
understand that it's the way of the
internet and the cost of the path I've
chosen. There's been days when it's been
rough on me mentally. It's not fun being
lied about, especially when it's about
things that are usually for a long time
have been a source of happiness and joy
for me. But again, that's life. I'll
continue exploring the world of people
and ideas with empathy and rigor,
wearing my heart on my sleeve as much as
I can. For me, that's the only way to
live. Anyway, a common attack on me is
about my time at MIT and Drexel, two
great universities I love and have
tremendous respect for. Since a bunch of
lies have accumulated online about me on
these topics to a sad and at times
hilarious degree, I thought I would once
more state the obvious facts about my
bio for the small number of you who may
care.
TLDDR, two things. First, as I say
often, including in a recent podcast
episode that somehow was listened to by
many millions of people, I proudly went
to Drexen University for my bachelor's,
masters, and doctor degrees.
Second, I am a research scientist at MIT
and have been there in a paid research
position for the last 10 years.
Allow me to elaborate a bit more on
these two things now, but please skip if
this is not at all interesting. So, like
I said, a common attack on me is that I
have no real affiliation with MIT. The
accusation, I guess, is that I'm falsely
claiming an MIT affiliation because I
taught a lecture there once.
Nope. That accusation against me is a
complete lie.
I have been at MIT for over 10 years in
a paid research position from 2015
to today. To be extra clear, I'm a
research scientist at MIT working in
lids, the laboratory for information and
decision systems in the college of
computing.
For now, since I'm still at MIT, you can
uh see me in the directory and on the
various lab pages. I have indeed given
many lectures at MIT over the years, a
small fraction of which I posted online.
Teaching for me always has been just for
fun and not part of my research work. I
personally think I suck at it, but I
have always learned and grown from the
experience. It's like Fineman spoke
about, if you want to understand
something deeply, it's good to try to
teach it.
But like I said, my main focus has
always been on research. I published
many peer-reviewed papers that you can
see in my Google Scholar profile. For my
first four years at MIT, I worked
extremely intensively. Most weeks were
80 to 100 hour work weeks. After that,
in 2019, I still kept my research
scientist position, but I split my time
taking a leap to pursue projects in AI
and robotics outside MIT and to dedicate
a lot of focus to the podcast. As I've
said, I've been continuously surprised
just how many hours preparing for an
episode takes. There are many episodes
of the podcast for which I have to read,
write, and think for 100, 200 or more
hours across multiple weeks and months.
Since 2020, I have not actively
published research papers. Just like the
podcast, I think it's something that's a
serious full-time effort. But not
publishing and doing full-time research
has been eating at me because I love
research and I love programming and
building systems that test out
interesting technical ideas, especially
in the context of human AI or human
robot interaction.
I hope to change this in the coming
months and years.
What I've come to realize about myself
is if I don't publish or if I don't
launch systems that people use, I
definitely feel like a piece of me is
missing. It legitimately is a source of
happiness for me. Anyway, I'm proud of
my time at MIT. I was and am constantly
surrounded by people much smarter than
me, many of whom have become lifelong
colleagues and friends.
MIT is a place I go to escape the world,
to focus on exploring fascinating
questions at the cutting edge of science
and engineering. This again makes me
truly happy. And it does hit pretty hard
on a psychological level when I'm
getting attacked over this.
Perhaps I'm doing something wrong. If I
am, I will try to do better.
In all this discussion of academic work,
I hope you know that I don't ever mean
to say that I'm an expert at anything.
In the podcast and in my private life, I
don't claim to be smart. In fact, I
often call myself an idiot and mean it.
I try to make fun of myself as much as
possible and in general to celebrate
others instead.
Now, to talk about Drexler University,
which I also love, am proud of and am
deeply grateful for my time there. As I
said, I went to Drexil for my
bachelor's, masters, and doctor degrees
in computer science and electrical
engineering.
I've talked about Drexel many times,
including, as I mentioned, at the end of
a recent podcast, the Donald Trump
episode, funny enough, that was listened
to by many millions of people, where I
answered a question about graduate
school and explained my own journey at
Drexel and how grateful I am for it. If
it's at all interesting to you, please
go listen to the end of that episode or
watch the related clip. At Drexel, I met
and worked with many brilliant
researchers and mentors from whom I've
learned a lot about engineering,
science, and life. There are many
valuable things I gained from my time at
Drexel. First, I took a large number of
very difficult math and theoretical
computer science courses. They taught me
how to think deeply and rigorously, and
also how to work hard and not give up
even if it feels like I'm too dumb to
find a solution to a technical problem.
Second, I programmed a lot during that
time, mostly C, C++. I programmed
robots, optimization algorithms,
computer vision systems, wireless
network protocols, multimodal machine
learning systems, and all kinds of
simulations of physical systems.
This is where I really develop a love
for programming, including yes, Emacs
and the Kinesis keyboard.
Uh I also during that time read a lot. I
played a lot of guitar, wrote a lot of
crappy poetry and uh trained a lot of uh
injudo and jiu-jitsu
which I cannot sing enough praises to.
Jiu-jitsu humbled me on a daily basis
throughout my 20s and it still does to
this very day whenever I get a chance to
train.
Anyway, I hope that the folks who
occasionally get swept up in enchanting
online crowds that want to tear down
others don't lose themselves in it too
much.
In the end, I still think there's more
good than bad in people. But we're all,
each of us, a mixed bag. I know I am
very much flawed. I speak awkwardly. I
sometimes say stupid I can get
irrationally emotional. I can be too
much of a dick when I should be kind. I
can lose myself in a biased rabbit hole
before I wake up to the bigger, more
accurate picture of reality.
I'm human and so are you. For better or
for worse.
And I do still believe we're in this
whole beautiful mess together.
I love you all.